======================================================================
Acute_Threat_Fear
======================================================================
20395400

Life-threatening danger is assumed to produce, in tandem, increases in both vigilance toward threat and stress-related symptoms, but no data test the validity of this assumption.
The authors examined associations, in real time, among imminent life-threatening danger, stress-related symptoms, and vigilance.
METHOD: Symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, and anxiety were measured in a civilian population (N=131) as a function of war-related stress, operationalized as the time available for seeking cover from rocket attack.
A computerized measure of threat-related vigilance using a classic dot-probe attention task was also collected.
RESULTS: PTSD symptoms, depression, and anxiety increased as a function of war-related threat.
Acute proximal threat was associated with avoidance of, rather than vigilance toward, negative valence information.
For participants within rocket range, the magnitude of threat bias varied with the magnitude of distress symptoms, such that as bias away from threat increased, distress symptoms increased.
These data challenge current thinking about the role of attention in stress responding.
Attentional threat avoidance may reduce the acute impact of imminent threat, but this may come at a price in terms of an elevated risk for psychopathology.

28675115

Learned safety, a learning process in which a cue becomes associated with the absence of threat, is disrupted in individuals with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
A bi-directional relationship exists between smoking and PTSD and one potential explanation is that nicotine-associated changes in cognition facilitate PTSD emotional dysregulation by disrupting safety associations.
Therefore, we investigated whether nicotine would disrupt learned safety by enhancing fear associated with a safety cue.
In the present study, C57BL/6 mice were administered acute or chronic nicotine and trained over three days in a differential backward trace conditioning paradigm consisting of five trials of a forward conditioned stimulus (CS)+ (Light) co-terminating with a footshock unconditioned stimulus followed by a backward CS- (Tone) presented 20 s after cessation of the unconditioned stimulus.
Summation testing found that acute nicotine disrupted learned safety, but chronic nicotine had no effect.
Another group of animals administered acute nicotine showed fear when presented with the backward CS (Light) alone, indicating the formation of a maladaptive fear association with the backward CS.
Finally, we investigated the brain regions involved by administering nicotine directly into the dorsal hippocampus, ventral hippocampus, and prelimbic cortex.
Infusion of nicotine into the dorsal hippocampus disrupted safety learning.

19931549

There is mounting evidence that single administrations of glucocorticoids may acutely reduce human fear.
We previously reported that administration of cortisol acutely reduced non-spatial selective attention to fearful faces and likewise reduced preferential processing of fearful faces in a spatial working memory task.
Here we report the acute effects of 40 mg cortisol (administered in a double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover design) on a different experimental task for measuring threat-selective attention.
Twenty healthy young males had to localize a target which was presented in a peripheral location that was either gazed at or not by a preceding dynamic happy or fearful face.
This reliable method has been used repeatedly to demonstrate fear-driven selective attention.
Present results showed that after placebo, as usual, the fearful gaze cues caused stronger orienting of attention than happy faces.
Cortisol abolished this typical anxious response pattern, but only in low anxious participants.
These data provide evidence that cortisol acutely influences also spatial threat-selective attention.
Possible neuroendocrine mechanisms are discussed.

24076207

Although the long-acting opiate methadone is commonly used to treat drug addiction, relatively little is known about the effects of withdrawal from this drug in preclinical models.
The current study examined affective, neuroendocrine, and somatic signs of withdrawal from the longer-acting methadone derivative l-alpha-acetylmethydol (LAAM) in rats.
Anxiety-like behavior during both spontaneous and antagonist-precipitated withdrawal was measured by potentiation of the startle reflex.
Withdrawal elevated corticosterone and somatic signs and blunted circadian variations in baseline startle responding.
In addition, fear to an explicit, Pavlovian conditioned stimulus (fear-potentiated startle) was enhanced.
These data suggest that anxiety-like behavior as measured using potentiated startle responding does not emerge spontaneously during withdrawal from chronic opiate exposure - in contrast to withdrawal from acute drug exposure - but rather is manifested as exaggerated fear in response to explicit threat cues.

16204321

Late-latency auditory and somatosensory evoked potentials are sensitive to some centrally acting drugs and to certain psychological interventions.
In this experiment we compared the effects of acute doses of a benzodiazepine, diazepam and an H(1) histamine receptor-blocking sedative, diphenhydramine, on auditory and somatosensory evoked potentials within the latency range 100-500 ms in a fear conditioning paradigm.
Twelve healthy males (18-30 years) participated in three sessions at weekly intervals in which they received diazepam 10mg, diphenhydramine 75 mg and placebo in a balanced, double-blind, crossover protocol.
One hundred and twenty min after diphenhydramine or 60 min after diazepam, they underwent an 8 min recording period in which auditory evoked potentials elicited by 40 ms, 95 dB[A], 1 kHz tones, and somatosensory evoked potentials elicited by a mildly painful electric shock (1.8 mA, 50 ms) were recorded at Cz (vertex).
Each session consisted of four blocks of trials in which either the sound pulse or the shock was presented.
Alternate blocks were designated SAFE or THREAT ('context' conditions); in THREAT blocks subjects were warned that shocks would be delivered via electrodes placed on the wrist (electrodes were removed during SAFE blocks).
In one SAFE and one THREAT block, the sound stimuli and shocks (shocks were delivered only in the THREAT block) were preceded by a 2 s conditioned stimulus (CS: a red light) ('cue' condition).
Diazepam, but not diphenhydramine, reduced the amplitude of the P2 auditory evoked potential.
The THREAT context was associated with increased N1 and reduced N2 potential amplitudes.
The CS had no effect on the amplitudes, but markedly reduced the latencies of the N1, P2 and N2 potentials under the THREAT condition.
Diazepam reduced the amplitudes of the somatosensory potential evoked by the shock; the CS shortened the latencies of the later components of the response.
Diazepam and diphenhydramine were approximately equi-sedative in the doses used in this experiment, as judged by visual analogue self-rating scales.
The results indicate that the suppression of late-latency auditory and somatosensory evoked potentials by diazepam is not simply a reflection of sedation.
Late-latency evoked potentials can be modified by an aversive CS, but the components that are sensitive to the CS are different from those that are sensitive to diazepam.

27173662

BACKGROUND: Recent laboratory studies have shown that acute alcohol intoxication selectively and effectively dampens aversive responding to uncertain threat.
An emerging hypothesis is that individuals who exhibit heightened reactivity to uncertain threat may be especially motivated to use alcohol to dampen their distress, setting the stage for negative reinforcement processes to drive excessive alcohol use.
However, no study to date has directly examined whether current problematic drinkers exhibit heightened reactivity to uncertain threat as would be expected.
METHODS: The present study was therefore designed to examine the association between current problematic alcohol use and reactivity to uncertain threat during sobriety in two, independent samples.
In Study 1 (n=221) and Study 2 (n=74), adult participants completed the same well-validated threat-of-shock task which separately probes responses to temporally predictable and unpredictable threat.
Startle potentiation was measured as an index of aversive responding.
Problematic alcohol use was defined as number of binge episodes within the past 30days in Study 1 and total scores on a self-report measure of hazardous drinking in Study 2.
RESULTS: As hypothesized, across both studies greater levels of problematic drinking were associated with greater startle potentiation to unpredictable threat.
In Study 2, hazardous drinking scores were also positively associated with startle potentiation to predictable threat.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings are notably consistent with the notion that heightened reactivity to uncertain threat is an important individual difference factor associated with the onset and/or maintenance of problematic drinking behaviors and may therefore be a novel prevention and intervention target.

20866019

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has in some cases been associated with significant psychological effects and/or personality change.
These effects occur sometimes as acute changes experienced intraoperatively or during the initial setting of the stimulator and sometimes as longer term progressive changes in the months following surgery.
Sometimes they are the intended outcome of treatment, and in other cases they are an unintended side-effect.
In all of these circumstances some patients and caregivers have described the psychological effects of DBS as frightening or disconcerting.
I trace the source of these negative reactions to the fear that stimulation-related psychological and personality changes represent a threat to personal identity and agency.
This issue has implications both for philosophical theories of personal identity and agency and for clinical concerns.
A narrative account of personal identity is developed to illuminate the nature of the threat to identity and agency DBS potentially poses, and to suggest steps that might be taken to mitigate and avoid these threats.

16247114

Peritraumatic responses, aside from dissociation, have been understudied in acute trauma populations.
Participants were 172 female rape, 68 assault, and 80 robbery victims recruited through formal reporting agencies and assessed 1 month after the crime.
Despite substantial overlap across crimes, rape victims reported more emotional responses reflecting fear, detachment, shame, and more nonactive behavioral responses.
Regression analysis examining the prediction of perceived threat by peritraumatic responses and crime variables indicated that increased duration of crimes; decreased calmness; increased fear; numbing; use of begging, pleading, and crying; and attempts to reason with the perpetrator(s) were all significantly associated with increased appraisal of threat.

29555429

Excessive stress exposure often leads to emotional dysfunction, characterized by disruptions in healthy emotional learning, expression, and regulation processes.
A prefrontal cortex (PFC)-amygdala circuit appears to underlie these important emotional processes.
However, limited human neuroimaging research has investigated whether these brain regions underlie the altered emotional function that develops with stress.
Therefore, the present study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate stress-induced changes in PFC-amygdala function during Pavlovian fear conditioning.
Participants completed a variant of the Montreal Imaging Stress Task (MIST) followed (25min later) by a Pavlovian fear conditioning task during fMRI.
Self-reported stress to the MIST was used to identify three stress-reactivity groups (Low, Medium, and High).
Psychophysiological, behavioral, and fMRI signal responses were compared between the three stress-reactivity groups during fear conditioning.
Fear learning, indexed via participant expectation of the unconditioned stimulus during conditioning, increased with stress reactivity.
Further, the High stress-reactivity group demonstrated greater autonomic arousal (i.e., skin conductance response, SCR) to both conditioned and unconditioned stimuli compared to the Low and Medium stress-reactivity groups.
Finally, the High stress group did not regulate the emotional response to threat.
More specifically, the High stress-reactivity group did not show a negative relationship between conditioned and unconditioned SCRs.
Stress-induced changes in these emotional processes paralleled changes in dorsolateral, dorsomedial, and ventromedial PFC function.
These findings demonstrate that acute stress facilitates fear learning, enhances autonomic arousal, and impairs emotion regulation, and suggests these stress-induced changes in emotional function are mediated by the PFC.

25414863

BACKGROUND: Leukemia and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) create physical, psychological, social, and spiritual distresses in patients.
Understanding this threatening situation in adults with leukemia undergoing HSCT will assist health care professionals in providing holistic care to the patients.
The aim of the present study was exploring the perceived threat in adults with leukemia undergoing HSCT.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This article is part of a longitudinal qualitative study which used the grounded theory approach and was conducted in 2009-2011.
Ten adults with acute leukemia scheduled for HSCT were recruited from the Hematology-Oncology Research Center and Stem Cell Transplantation, Shariati Hospital in Tehran, Iran.
A series of pre-transplant and post-transplant in-depth interviews were held in the hospital's HSCT wards.
Totally, 18 interviews were conducted.
Three written narratives were also obtained from the participants.
The Corbin and Strauss approach was used to analyze the data.
RESULTS: Perceived threat was one of the main categories that emerged from the data.
This category included four subcategories, "inattention to the signs and symptoms", "doubt and anxiety", "perception of danger and time limitation" and "change of life conditions", which occurred in linear progression over time.
CONCLUSION: Suffering from leukemia and experiencing HSCT are events that are uniquely perceived by patients.
This threatening situation can significantly effect perception of patients and cause temporary or permanent alterations in patients' lives.
Health care professionals can help these patients by deeper understanding of their experiences and effective interventions.

21269779

This study examined the effects of oral administration of 20mg hydrocortisone on baseline and fear-potentiated startle in 63 male veterans with or without PTSD.
The procedure was based on a two-session, within-subject design in which acoustic startle eyeblink responses were recorded during intervals of threat or no threat of electric shock.
Results showed that the magnitude of the difference between startle responses recorded during anticipation of imminent shock compared to "safe" periods was reduced after hydrocortisone administration relative to placebo.
This effect did not vary as a function of PTSD group nor were there were any significant group differences in other indices startle amplitude.
Findings suggest that the acute elevations in systemic cortisol produced by hydrocortisone administration may have fear-inhibiting effects.
This finding may have implications for understanding the role of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA)-axis function in vulnerability and resilience to traumatic stress.

23073641

Two things are worth remembering about an aversive event: What made it happen?
What made it cease?
If a stimulus precedes an aversive event, it becomes a signal for threat and will later elicit behavior indicating conditioned fear.
However, if the stimulus is presented upon cessation of the aversive event, it elicits behavior indicating conditioned "relief."
What are the neuronal bases for such learning?
Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in humans we found that a fear-conditioned stimulus activates amygdala but not striatum, whereas a relief-conditioned stimulus activates striatum but not amygdala.
Correspondingly, acute inactivation of amygdala or of ventral striatum in rats respectively abolished only conditioned fear or only conditioned relief.
Thus, the behaviorally opponent memories supported by onset and offset of aversive events engage and require fear and reward networks, respectively.
This may explain attraction to stimuli associated with the cessation of trauma or of panic attacks.

22491355

Serotonin is strongly implicated in the mammalian stress response, but surprisingly little is known about its mode of action.
Recent data suggest that serotonin can inhibit aversive responding in humans, but this remains underspecified.
In particular, data in rodents suggest that global serotonin depletion may specifically increase long-duration bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST)-mediated aversive responses (ie, anxiety), but not short-duration BNST-independent responses (ie, fear).
Here, we extend these findings to humans.
In a balanced, placebo-controlled crossover design, healthy volunteers (n=20) received a controlled diet with and without the serotonin precursor tryptophan (acute tryptophan depletion; ATD).
Aversive states were indexed by translational acoustic startle measures.
Fear and anxiety were operationally defined as the increase in startle reactivity during short- and long-duration threat periods evoked by predictable shock (fear-potentiated startle) and by the context in which the shocks were administered (anxiety-potentiated startle), respectively.
ATD significantly increased long-duration anxiety-potentiated startle but had no effect on short-duration fear-potentiated startle.
These results suggest that serotonin depletion in humans selectively increases anxiety but not fear.
Current translational frameworks support the proposition that ATD thus disinhibits dorsal raphe-originating serotonergic control of corticotropin-releasing hormone-mediated excitation of the BNST.
This generates a candidate neuropharmacological mechanism by which depleted serotonin may increase response to sustained threats, alongside clear implications for our understanding of the manifestation and treatment of mood and anxiety disorders.

30265859

Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is associated with dysfunction of the neural circuitry that supports fear learning and memory processes.
However, much of what is known about neural dysfunction in PTSD is based on research in chronic PTSD populations.
Less is known about neural function that supports fear learning acutely following trauma exposure.
Determining the acute effects of trauma exposure on brain function would provide new insight into the neural processes that mediate the cognitive-affective dysfunction associated with PTSD.
Therefore, the present study investigated neural activity that supports fear learning and memory processes in recently Trauma-Exposed (TE) and Non-Trauma-Exposed (NTE) participants.
Participants completed a Pavlovian fear conditioning procedure during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
During fMRI, participants' threat expectancy was continuously monitored.
NTE participants showed greater threat expectancy during warning than safety cues, while no difference was observed in the TE group.
This finding suggests TE participants overgeneralized the fear association to the safety cue.
Further, only the TE group showed a negative relationship between fMRI signal responses within dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (PFC) and threat expectancy during safety cues.
These results suggest the dorsomedial PFC mediates overgeneralization of learned fear as an acute result of trauma exposure.
Finally, neural activity within the PFC and inferior parietal lobule showed a negative relationship with PTSD symptom severity assessed three months posttrauma.
Thus, neural activity measured acutely following trauma exposure predicted future PTSD symptom severity.
The present findings elucidate the acute effects of trauma exposure on cognitive-affective function and provide new insight into the neural mechanisms of PTSD.

24151118

As a step toward addressing limitations in the current psychiatric diagnostic system, the National Institute of Mental Health recently developed the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) to stimulate integrative research-spanning self-report, behavior, neural circuitry, and molecular/genetic mechanisms-on core psychological processes implicated in mental illness.
Here, we use the RDoC conceptualization to review research on threat responses, reward processing, and their interaction.
The first section of the manuscript highlights the pivotal role of exaggerated threat responses-mediated by circuits connecting the frontal cortex, amygdala, and midbrain-in anxiety, and reviews data indicating that genotypic variation in the serotonin system is associated with hyperactivity in this circuitry, which elevates the risk for anxiety and mood disorders.
In the second section, we describe mounting evidence linking anhedonic behavior to deficits in psychological functions that rely heavily on dopamine signaling, especially cost/benefit decision making and reward learning.
The third section covers recent studies that document negative effects of acute threats and chronic stress on reward responses in humans.
The mechanisms underlying such effects are unclear, but the fourth section reviews new optogenetic data in rodents indicating that GABAergic inhibition of midbrain dopamine neurons, driven by activation of the habenula, may play a fundamental role in stress-induced anhedonia.
In addition to its basic scientific value, a better understanding of interactions between the neural systems that mediate threat and reward responses may offer relief from the burdensome condition of anxious depression.

30760585

In today's world, mass-media and online social networks present us with unprecedented exposure to second-hand, vicarious experiences and thereby the chance of forming associations between previously innocuous events (e.g., being in a subway station) and aversive outcomes (e.g., footage or verbal reports from a violent terrorist attack) without direct experience.
Such social threat, or fear, learning can have dramatic consequences, as manifested in acute stress symptoms and maladaptive fears.
However, most research has so far focused on socially acquired threat responses that are expressed as increased arousal rather than active behavior.
In three experiments (n = 120), we examined the effect of indirect experiences on behaviors by establishing a link between social threat learning and instrumental decision making.
We contrasted learning from direct experience (i.e., Pavlovian conditioning) (experiment 1) against two common forms of social threat learning-social observation (experiment 2) and verbal instruction (experiment 3)-and how this learning transferred to subsequent instrumental decision making using behavioral experiments and computational modeling.
We found that both types of social threat learning transfer to decision making in a strong and surprisingly inflexible manner.
Notably, computational modeling indicated that the transfer of observational and instructed threat learning involved different computational mechanisms.
Our results demonstrate the strong influence of others' expressions of fear on one's own decisions and have important implications for understanding both healthy and pathological human behaviors resulting from the indirect exposure to threatening events.

28013055

Cognitive theories of anxiety psychopathology cite biased attention towards threat as a central vulnerability and maintaining factor.
However, many studies have found threat bias indices to have poor reliability and have failed to observe the theorized relationship between threat bias and anxiety symptoms; this may be due to the non-unitary nature of threat bias and the influence of state-level variables on its expression.
Accumulating data suggests that state anxious mood is important for the robust expression of threat bias and for relations to emerge between threat bias and symptoms, though this possibility has not been experimentally tested.
Eye-tracking was used to assess multiple forms of threat bias (i.e., early vigilance, sustained attention, facilitated engagement, delayed disengagement) thought to be related to anxiety.
A non-clinical sample (N = 165) was recruited to test the hypothesis that biased attention towards threat, but not dysphoric or positive emotional stimuli, during an anxious mood induction, but not at a pre-stress baseline, would prospectively predict greater worry symptoms on days in which more naturalistic stressors occurred.
Results revealed the hypothesized moderation effect for sustained attention towards threat after the mood induction but not at baseline, though sustained attention towards dysphoric stimuli also moderated the effect of stressors on worry.
Worry-relevant sustained attention towards negative emotional stimuli may be a partially mood-context dependent phenomenon.

16115784

The behavioral analysis of laboratory rats is usually confined to the level of overt behavior, like locomotion, behavioral inhibition, instrumental responses, and others.
Apart from such visible outcome, however, behaviorally relevant information can also be obtained when analyzing the animals' ultrasonic vocalization, which is typically emitted in highly motivational situations, like 22-kHz calls in response to acute or conditioned threat.
To further investigate such vocalizations and their relationship with overt behavior, we tested male Wistar rats in a paradigm of Pavlovian fear conditioning, where a tone stimulus (CS) was preceding an aversive foot-shock (US) in a distinct environment.
Importantly, the shock dose was varied between groups (0-1.1 mA), and its acute and conditioned outcome were determined.
The analysis of visible behavior confirms the usefulness of immobility as a measure of fear conditioning, especially when higher shock doses were used.
Rearing and grooming, on the other hand, were more useful to detect conditioned effects with lower shock levels.
Ultrasonic vocalization occurred less consistently than changes in overt behavior; however, dose-response relationships were also observed during the phase of conditioning, for example, in latency, call rate and lengths, intervals between calls, and sound amplitude.
Furthermore, total calling time (and rate) were highly correlated with overt behavior, namely behavioral inhibition as measured through immobility.
These correlations were observed during the phase of fear conditioning, and the subsequent tests.
Importantly, conditioned effects in overt behavior were observed, both, to the context and to the CS presented in this context, whereas conditioned vocalization to the context was not observed (except for one rat).
In support and extent of previous results, the present data show that a detailed analysis of ultrasonic vocalization can substantially broaden and refine the spectrum of analysis in behavioral work with rats, since it can provide information about situational-, state-, and subject-dependent factors which are partly distinct from what is visible to the experimenter.

21855571

Social fearfulness is expressed on a continuum of severity from moderate distress to incapacitating fear.
The present article focuses on the brain states associated with this broad dimension of social anxiety in humans.
In total, 70 published studies are summarized documenting the neural correlates of social anxiety during states of rest, threat-related cognitive-affective activation, and acute symptom provocation.
Neural exaggeration in limbic (amygdala) and paralimbic (insula) regions appears to be associated with functional outcomes involving increased attention for and processing of social threat.
Evidence is also reviewed showing that social anxiety is characterized by atypical functional connectivity in certain brain networks.
Despite a higher prevalence of social anxiety disorder among females, males have been overrepresented in the published clinical studies (constituting approximately 56% of the total participants).
We evaluate the prospects of nonhuman animal models of social anxiety and discuss several promising directions for future research.
The review highlights the need to adopt an integrative, network-based approach to the study of the neural substrates underlying social anxiety.

14998902

Exposure to a deadly threat, an adult male rat, induced the release of corticosterone in 14-day-old rat pups.
The endocrine stress response was decreased when the pups were reunited with their mother immediately after exposure.
These findings demonstrate that social variables can reduce the consequences of an aversive experience.

20371819

Recent findings obtained in patients with phobias or trauma-related anxiety disorders raise doubts concerning the interrelation between acute fear relief during an exposure-based therapeutic session and beneficial treatment progress.
In a mouse model explicit for exposure therapy, we challenge the view that within-session fear reduction is the turning point for relearning of a stimulus-threat association.
Even though within-session extinction of auditory-cued fear memory was identical for prolonged and spaced tone presentations, only the latter caused between-session extinction.
Furthermore, spaced tone presentations led to between-session extinction even in the complete absence of within-session extinction, as observed for remote fear memories and in case of abolished cannabinoid receptor type 1 signaling.
Induction of between-session extinction was accompanied by an increase in the number of c-Fos-positive neurons within the basolateral amygdala, the cingulate cortex, and the dentate gyrus, independent of the level of within-session extinction.
Together, our findings demonstrate that within-session extinction is neither sufficient nor essential for between-session extinction, thus calling for a reconsideration of current concepts underlying exposure-based therapies.

25451788

Psychophysiological measures of fear expression provide observable intermediate phenotypes of fear-related symptoms.
Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) advocate using neurobiological intermediate phenotypes that provide dimensional correlates of psychopathology.
Negative Valence Systems in the RDoC matrix include the construct of acute threat, which can be measured on a physiological level using potentiation of the acoustic startle reflex assessed via electromyography recordings of the orbicularis oculi muscle.
Impairments in extinction of fear-potentiated startle due to high levels of fear (termed fear load) during the early phases of extinction have been observed in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
The goals of the current work were to examine dimensional associations between fear-related symptoms of PTSD and fear load variables to test their validity as an intermediate phenotype.
We examined extinction of fear-potentiated startle in a cohort (n=269) of individuals with a broad range of civilian trauma exposure (range 0-13 traumatic events per person, mean=3.5).
Based on previously reported findings, we hypothesized that fear load would be significantly associated with intrusion and fear memories of an index traumatic event.
The results indicated that early extinction was correlated with intrusive thoughts (p=0.0007) and intense physiological reactions to trauma reminders (p=0.036).
Degree of adult or childhood trauma exposure, and depression severity were not associated with fear load.
After controlling for age, sex, race, income, level of prior trauma, and level of fear conditioning, fear load during extinction was still significantly predictive of intrusive thoughts (p=0.004).
The significance of these findings is that they support dimensional associations with symptom severity rather than diagnostic category and, as such, fear load may emerge as a transdiagnostic intermediate phenotype expressed across fear-related disorders (e.g., specific phobia, social phobia).

21656765

Development of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is influenced by external factors during early life in mammals, which optimizes adult function for predicted conditions.
We have hypothesized that adolescence represents a sensitive period for the development of some aspects of adult stress response regulation.
This was based on prior work showing that repeated exposure of rats to a stressor across an adolescent period increases fearfulness in a novel environment in adulthood and results in lower levels of dopamine receptor subtype-2 protein in prefrontal cortex.
Here, we further our investigation of both acute and long-term effects of repeated adolescent stressor exposure on physiological (i.e., corticosterone) and behavioral (i.e., defensive behavior) measures of stress responding in male and female rats.
Furthermore, we compared outcomes with those following identical manipulations administered in early adulthood and found that animals exposed to cues of predation threat during adolescence showed the most robust defensive responses to a homotypic stressor encountered in adulthood.
Peer interaction during control manipulation in adolescence was identified as an important individual characteristic mediating development of adult defensive strategies.

20964748

This study was primarily aimed for developing and testing a valid and reliable instrument that measures perceived threat of the risk for graft rejection after organ transplantation.
A second aim was to report descriptive data regarding graft rejection and Health-Related Quality of Life.
The most serious risk connected with transplantations besides infection is graft rejection.
Non experimental, descriptive involving instrument development and psychometric assessment.
Questionnaires about perceived threat of the risk for graft rejection and Health-Related Quality of Life were mailed to 229 OTRs between 19-65 years old.
The items were formed from a previous interview study.
Patients were transplanted with a kidney, a liver or a heart and/or a lung.
All patients with follow-up time of one year +/- three months and three years +/- three months were included.
With an 81% response rate, the study comprised of 185 OTRs, who had received either a kidney (n = 117), a liver (n = 39) or heart or lung (n = 29).
Three homogenous factors of perceived threat for graft rejection were revealed, labelled 'intrusive anxiety', 'graft-related threat' and 'lack of control'.
Tests of internal consistency showed good item-scale convergent and discriminatory validity.
A majority of the OTRs scored low levels for 'intrusive anxiety'.
The kidney transplant recipients experienced more 'graft-related threat' by acute graft rejection than those transplanted with a liver, heart or lung.
In conclusion, this study suggests that it is possible to measure the perceived threat of the risk for graft rejection in three homogenous factors.
Relevance to clinical practice.
The instrument perceived threat of the risk for graft rejection, might be usable to measure the impact of fear of graft rejection, to predict needs of pedagogical intervention strategies to reduce fear and to improve Health-Related Quality of Life related to graft rejection.

29902666

Recent evidence suggests that the steroid hormone testosterone can decrease the functional coupling between orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and amygdala.
Theoretically this decoupling has been linked to a testosterone-driven increase of goal-directed behaviour in case of threat, but this has never been studied directly.
Therefore, we placed twenty-two women in dynamically changing situations of escapable and inescapable threat after a within-subject placebo controlled testosterone administration.
Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) we provide evidence that testosterone activates the left lateral OFC (LOFC) in preparation of active goal-directed escape and decouples this OFC area from a subcortical threat system including the central-medial amygdala, hypothalamus and periaqueductal gray.
This LOFC decoupling was specific to threatening situations, a point that was further emphasized by an absence of such decoupling in a second experiment focused on resting-state connectivity.
These results not only confirm that testosterone administration decouples the LOFC from the subcortical threat system, but also show that this is specifically the case in response to acute threat, and ultimately leads to an increase in LOFC activity when the participant prepares a goal-directed action to escape.
Together these results for the first time provide a detailed understanding of functional brain alterations induced by testosterone under threat conditions, and corroborate and extend the view that testosterone prepares the brain for goal-directed action in case of threat.

16971899

Serotonin reuptake inhibitors may increase symptoms of anxiety immediately following treatment initiation.
The present study examined whether acute citalopram increased fear-potentiated startle to predictable and/or unpredictable shocks in healthy subjects.
Eighteen healthy subjects each received two treatments, placebo and 20 mg citalopram in a crossover design.
Participants were exposed to three conditions including one in which predictable aversive shocks were signaled by a cue, a second in which unpredictable shocks were anticipated, and a third in which no shocks were administered.
Changes in aversive states were investigated using acoustic startle stimuli.
Citalopram did not affect baseline startle.
However, the phasic startle potentiation to the threat cue in the predictable condition was robustly increased by acute citalopram.
The sustained startle potentiation in the unpredictable conditions was also increased by citalopram, but only when the drug was given during the first session.
These results indicate that a single dose of citalopram is not anxiogenic in itself, but can exacerbate the expression of fear and anxiety.

20189314

Phan et al (2008) recently reported that an acute dose of oral THC is associated with a decrease in threat-related amygdala reactivity during a social threat stimulus task.
However, to date, those findings have not been replicated, and have not been extended to clinical studies involving smoked rather than oral cannabis.
In this study, we hypothesized that level of cannabis smoked by participants in our treatment study would be inversely related to the level of threat-related amygdala reactivity.
Subjects were recruited from among participants in our double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of fluoxetine in comorbid youth with cannabis dependence/major depression.
The threat-related amygdala reactivity task used by Hariri et al (2009) was completed during BOLD fMRI scans at study baseline and then again 12 weeks later at the end of the trial.
Data are available from six subjects with pre-and post-treatment fMRI data.
During the course of the study, five of the six subjects demonstrated a decrease in their level of cannabis use, with a mean decrease of 64%, and those persons all demonstrated an increase in their level of amygdala reactivity.
One subject demonstrated an increase in their level of cannabis use (a 79% increase) during the treatment trial, and that person demonstrated a decrease in their level of amygdala reactivity.
Thus, a higher level of cannabis use was consistently associated with a lower level of amygdala reactivity across all subjects (matched pairs t = 2.70, df = 5, p < 0.05, two-tailed).
These findings are consistent with the reports by Phan et al (2008) and Hariri et al (2009) suggesting that cannabinoids have an inhibitory effect on threat-related amygdala reactivity.

28784793

Stress broadly affects the ability to regulate emotions and may contribute to generalization of threat-related behaviors to harmless stimuli.
Behavioral generalization also tends to increase over time as memory precision for recent events gives way to more gist-like representations.
Thus, acute stress coupled with a delay in time from a negative experience may be a strong predictor of the transition from normal to generalized fear expression.
Here, we investigated the effect of a single-episode acute stressor on generalization of aversive learning when stress is administered either immediately after an aversive learning event or following a delay.
In a between-subjects design, healthy adult volunteers underwent threat (fear) conditioning using a tone-conditioned stimulus paired with an electric shock to the wrist and another tone not paired with shock.
Behavioral generalization was tested to a range of novel tones either on the same day (experiment 1) or 24 h later (experiment 2) and was preceded by either an acute stress induction or a control task.
Anticipatory sympathetic arousal [i.e., skin conductance responses (SCRs)] and explicit measures of shock expectancy served as dependent measures.
Stress administered shortly after threat conditioning did not affect behavioral generalization.
In contrast, stress administered following a delay led to heightened arousal and increased generalization of SCRs and explicit measures of shock expectancy.
These findings show that acute stress increases generalization of older but not recent threat memories and have clinical relevance to understanding overgeneralization characteristics of anxiety and stress-related disorders.

26747839

OBJECTIVE: To examine whether exposure to curve versus sharp contours in the built healthcare setting produces systematic and identifiable patterns of amygdala activation and behavioral response in healthy adults.
BACKGROUND: Recent studies in cognitive neuroscience suggest that humans prefer objects with a curved contour compared with objects that have pointed features and a sharp-angled contour.
An implicit perception of threat represented by sharp objects, in humans, was hypothesized to explain this bias.
METHOD: The study adopted a within-subject experimental design, where 36 subjects (representing three age-groups and both sexes) were exposed to a randomized order of 312 real-life images (objects, interiors, exteriors, landscape, and a set of control images).
Amygdala activation was simultaneously captured using functional magnetic resonance imaging technology.
Subjects' preference (like/dislike) data were also collected while in the scanner.
Data were collected in 2013.
RESULTS: In case of images depicting landscape and healthcare objects, brain scans show significant higher amygdala activation associated with sharp contours.
However, in relation to images depicting hospital interiors and exterior envelops, brain scans show significant higher amygdala activation associated with curve contours.
These activations pertain to exposure during the precognitive stages of the subjects' perception.
CONCLUSION: Hospital forms do have systematic impact on fear response during precognitive stages of human perception.
Whether this first impression colors the subsequent experience of an actual patient with real illness or injury is unknown.

26377804

The NIMH Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) initiative aims to describe key dimensional constructs underlying mental function across multiple units of analysis-from genes to observable behaviors-in order to better understand psychopathology.
The acute threat ("fear") construct of the RDoC Negative Valence System has been studied extensively from a translational perspective, and is highly pertinent to numerous psychiatric conditions, including anxiety and trauma-related disorders.
We examined genetic contributions to the construct of acute threat at two units of analysis within the RDoC framework: (1) neural circuits and (2) physiology.
Specifically, we focused on genetic influences on activation patterns of frontolimbic neural circuitry and on startle, skin conductance, and heart rate responses.
Research on the heritability of activation in threat-related frontolimbic neural circuitry is lacking, but physiological indicators of acute threat have been found to be moderately heritable (35-50%).
Genetic studies of the neural circuitry and physiology of acute threat have almost exclusively relied on the candidate gene method and, as in the broader psychiatric genetics literature, most findings have failed to replicate.
The most robust support has been demonstrated for associations between variation in the serotonin transporter (SLC6A4) and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) genes with threat-related neural activation and physiological responses.
However, unbiased genome-wide approaches using very large samples are needed for gene discovery, and these can be accomplished with collaborative consortium-based research efforts, such as those of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC) and Enhancing Neuro Imaging Genetics through Meta-Analysis (ENIGMA) Consortium.

20720535

Patients with generalized social anxiety disorder (GSAD) exhibit heightened activation of the amygdala in response to social cues conveying threat (eg, fearful/angry faces).
The neuropeptide oxytocin (OXT) decreases anxiety and stress, facilitates social encounters, and attenuates amygdala reactivity to threatening faces in healthy subjects.
The goal of this study was to examine the effects of OXT on fear-related amygdala reactivity in GSAD and matched healthy control (CON) subjects.
In a functional magnetic resonance imaging study utilizing a double-blind placebo-controlled within-subjects design, we measured amygdala activation to an emotional face matching task of fearful, angry, and happy faces following acute intranasal administration of OXT (24 IU or 40.32 mug) and placebo in 18 GSAD and 18 CON subjects.
Both the CON and GSAD groups activated bilateral amygdala to all emotional faces during placebo, with the GSAD group exhibiting hyperactivity specifically to fearful faces in bilateral amygdala compared with the CON group.
OXT had no effect on amygdala activity to emotional faces in the CON group, but attenuated the heightened amygdala reactivity to fearful faces in the GSAD group, such that the hyperactivity observed during the placebo session was no longer evident following OXT (ie, normalization).
These findings suggest that OXT has a specific effect on fear-related amygdala activity, particularly when the amygdala is hyperactive, such as in GSAD, thereby providing a brain-based mechanism of the impact of OXT in modulating the exaggerated processing of social signals of threat in patients with pathological anxiety.

28893930

The ability to adaptively regulate responses to the proximity of potential danger is critical to survival and imbalance in this system may contribute to psychopathology.
The bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) is implicated in defensive responding during uncertain threat anticipation whereas the amygdala may drive responding upon more acute danger.
This functional dissociation between the BNST and amygdala is however controversial, and human evidence scarce.
Here we used data from two independent functional magnetic resonance imaging studies [n = 108 males and n = 70 (45 females)] to probe how coordination between the BNST and amygdala may regulate responses during shock anticipation and actual shock confrontation.
In a subset of participants from Sample 2 (n = 48) we demonstrate that anticipation and confrontation evoke bradycardic and tachycardic responses, respectively.
Further, we show that in each sample when going from shock anticipation to the moment of shock confrontation neural activity shifted from a region anatomically consistent with the BNST toward the amygdala.
Comparisons of functional connectivity during threat processing showed overlapping yet also consistently divergent functional connectivity profiles for the BNST and amygdala.
Finally, childhood maltreatment levels predicted amygdala, but not BNST, hyperactivity during shock anticipation.
Our results support an evolutionary conserved, defensive distance-dependent dynamic balance between BNST and amygdala activity.
Shifts in this balance may enable shifts in defensive reactions via the demonstrated differential functional connectivity.
Our results indicate that early life stress may tip the neural balance toward acute threat responding and via that route predispose for affective disorder.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Previously proposed differential contributions of the BNST and amygdala to fear and anxiety have been recently debated.
Despite the significance of understanding their contributions to defensive reactions, there is a paucity of human studies that directly compared these regions on activity and connectivity during threat processing.
We show strong evidence for a dissociable role of the BNST and amygdala in threat processing by demonstrating in two large participant samples that they show a distinct temporal signature of threat responding as well as a discriminable pattern of functional connections and differential sensitivity to early life threat.

29223783

Fear generalization occurs when a response, previously acquired with a threatening stimulus, is transferred to a similar one.
However, it could be maladaptive when stimuli that do not represent a real threat are appraised as dangerous, which is a hallmark of several anxiety disorders.
Stress exposure is a major risk factor for the occurrence of anxiety disorders and it is well established that it influences different phases of fear memory; nevertheless, its impact on the generalization of contextual fear memories has been less studied.
In the present work, we have characterized the impact of acute restraint stress prior to contextual fear conditioning on the generalization of this fear memory, and the role of the GABAergic signaling within the basolateral amygdala complex (BLA) on the stress modulatory effects.
We have found that a single stress exposure promoted the generalization of this memory trace to a different context that was well discriminated in unstressed conditioned animals.
Moreover, this effect was dependent on the formation of a contextual associative memory and on the testing order (i.e., conditioning context first vs generalization context first).
Furthermore, we observed that increasing GABA-A signaling by intra-BLA midazolam administration prior to the stressful session exposure prevented the generalization of fear memory, whereas intra-BLA administration of the GABA-A antagonist (Bicuculline), prior to fear conditioning, induced the generalization of fear memory in unstressed rats.
We concluded that stress exposure, prior to contextual fear conditioning, promotes the generalization of fear memory and that the GABAergic transmission within the BLA has a critical role in this phenomenon.

26995802

The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that greater global and situational relationship satisfaction would reduce the negative impact of threatening information on acute pain.
An experimental design was used to manipulate threat and elicit acute pain via a cold pressor task.
The study was completed in a research laboratory at a large urban university in the Midwestern USA.
Participants were 134 couples, in which at least one individual was an undergraduate student.
After administration of a global relationship satisfaction measure, couples were randomly assigned to either receive high or low threatening information about the painful task.
Following the threat manipulation, couples discussed the upcoming task and rated their satisfaction with the interaction (i.e., situational relationship satisfaction).
The designated pain participant then completed the painful task alone.
The threat manipulation altered couples' perceived threat of pain.
Situational relationship satisfaction moderated the effect of threat on pain trajectories such that situational relationship satisfaction predicted less pain intensity at an earlier point in the task for the low threat condition than the high threat condition.
Greater global relationship satisfaction predicted greater likelihood of task completion among those in the low threat condition, whereas it was unrelated to task completion in the high threat condition.
Greater global relationship satisfaction also predicted lower pain intensity throughout the task.
These findings demonstrate that the interpersonal context is independently related to acute pain and may also alter the effect of threatening information on acute pain.

17604912

Chronically elevated HPA activity has often been associated with fear and anxiety, but there is evidence that single administrations of glucocorticoids may acutely reduce fear.
Moreover, peri-traumatic cortisol elevation may protect against development of post-traumatic stress disorder.
Hypervigilant processing of threat information plays a role in anxiety disorders and although relations with HPA functioning have been established, causality of these relations remains unclear.
Presently, self-reported anxiety and response time patterns on a masked emotional Stroop task with fearful faces were measured in 20 healthy young men after double-blind, placebo-controlled oral administration of 40 mg cortisol.
The masked fearful Stroop task measures vocal colornaming response latencies for pictures of neutral and fearful faces presented below the threshold for conscious perception.
Results showed increased response times on trials for fearful compared to neutral faces after placebo, but this emotional Stroop effect was acutely abolished by cortisol administration.
This effect was most pronounced in subjects with heightened anxiety levels.
This is the first evidence showing that exogenous cortisol acutely reduces anxiety-driven selective attention to threat.
These results extend earlier findings of acute fear reduction after glucocorticoid administration.
This suggests interactions of HPA functioning and vigilant attention in the pathogenesis of anxiety disorders.
Possible neuroendocrine mechanisms of action are discussed.

27808542

The use of fear conditioning and extinction paradigms to examine intermediate phenotypes of anxiety and stress-related disorders has facilitated the identification of neurobiological mechanisms that underlie specific components of abnormal psychological functioning.
Across species, acute pharmacologic manipulation of the endogenous cannabinoid system has provided evidence of its critical role in fear extinction, but the effects of chronic cannabis on extinction are relatively understudied.
In rats, chronic cannabinoid administration impairs fear extinction in a drug-free state.
Here we examine whether chronic cannabis use is associated with impaired fear extinction in humans.
Participants were healthy chronic cannabis users (n = 20) and nonuser controls with minimal lifetime cannabis use (n = 20) matched on age, sex, and race who all screened negative for psychiatric disorders.
A 2-day differential fear conditioning paradigm was used to test the hypothesis that chronic cannabis use would be associated with impaired extinction of the skin conductance response.
Consistent with hypotheses, chronic cannabis use was associated with reduced within-session extinction of skin conductance response on Day 1 (d = 0.78), and between-session extinction on Day 2 (d = 0.76).
Unexpectedly, cannabis use was also associated with reduced subjective differentiation between threat and safety stimuli during conditioning.
Replication and translation of findings are necessary to test potential mechanisms directly and examine whether impairments can be reversed pharmacologically or after a period of cannabis abstinence (PsycINFO Database Record)

15772862

In this study we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine the effects of acute tryptophan depletion (ATD), a well-recognised method for inducing transient cerebral serotonin depletion, on brain activation to fearful faces.
We predicted that ATD would increase the responsiveness of the amygdala to fearful faces as a function of individual variation in threat sensitivity.
Twelve healthy male volunteers received a tryptophan depleting drink or a tryptophan balancing amino acid drink (placebo) in a double-blind crossover design.
Five hours after drink ingestion participants were scanned whilst viewing fearful, happy and neutral faces.
Consistent with previous findings, fearful faces induced significant signal change in the bilateral amygdala/hippocampus as well as the fusiform face area and the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
Furthermore, ATD modulated amygdala/hippocampus activation in response to fearful relative to happy faces as a function of self-reported threat sensitivity (as measured with the Behavioral Inhibition Scale; Carver CS, White TL (1994) Behavioral inhibition, behavioral activation, and affective responses to impending reward and punishment: the BIS/BAS scales J Pers Soc Psychol 67:319-333).
The data support the hypothesis that individual variation in threat sensitivity interacts with manipulation of 5-HT function to bias the processing of amygdala-dependent threat-relevant stimuli.

26329286

Fear promotes adaptive responses to threats.
However, when the level of fear is not proportional to the level of threat, maladaptive fear-related behaviors characteristic of anxiety disorders result.
Post-traumatic stress disorder develops in response to a traumatic event, and patients often show sensitized reactions to mild stressors associated with the trauma.
Stress-enhanced fear learning (SEFL) is a rodent model of this sensitized responding, in which exposure to a 15-shock stressor nonassociatively enhances subsequent fear conditioning training with only a single trial.
We examined the role of corticosterone (CORT) in SEFL.
Administration of the CORT synthesis blocker metyrapone prior to the stressor, but not at time points after, attenuated SEFL.
Moreover, CORT co-administered with metyrapone rescued SEFL.
However, CORT alone without the stressor was not sufficient to produce SEFL.
In these same animals, we then looked for correlates of SEFL in terms of changes in excitatory receptor expression.
Western blot analysis of the basolateral amygdala (BLA) revealed an increase in the GluA1 AMPA receptor subunit that correlated with SEFL.
Thus, CORT is permissive to trauma-induced changes in BLA function.

20977330

Acute pain informs the individual that there is an imminent threat of body damage, and is associated with the urge to escape and avoid.
Fear learning takes place when neutral stimuli receive the propensity to predict the occurrence of pain, and when defensive responses are initiated in anticipation of potential threats to the integrity of the body.
Fear-avoidance models have been put forward featuring the role of individual differences in catastrophic interpretations of pain in the modulation of learning and avoidance.
Based on extensive literature on fear reduction in anxiety disorders; cognitive-behavioral treatments have been developed and applied to patients with chronic pain reporting substantial pain-related fear.
In this article, we discuss mechanisms underlying the acquisition, the assessment and extinction of pain-related fear through the cognitive-behavioral treatment of pain-related fear.
Finally, we provide a number of critical notes and directions for future research in the field of chronic pain and pain-related fear.

======================================================================
Arousal
======================================================================
26761427

BACKGROUND: Research suggests that interaction between humans and digital environments characterizes a form of companionship in addition to technical convenience.
To this effect, humans have attempted to design computer systems able to demonstrably empathize with the human affective experience.
Facial electromyography (EMG) is one such technique enabling machines to access to human affective states.
Numerous studies have investigated the effects of valence emotions on facial EMG activity captured over the corrugator supercilii (frowning muscle) and zygomaticus major (smiling muscle).
The arousal emotion, specifically, has not received much research attention, however.
In the present study, we sought to identify intensive valence and arousal affective states via facial EMG activity.
METHODS: Ten blocks of affective pictures were separated into five categories: neutral valence/low arousal (0VLA), positive valence/high arousal (PVHA), negative valence/high arousal (NVHA), positive valence/low arousal (PVLA), and negative valence/low arousal (NVLA), and the ability of each to elicit corresponding valence and arousal affective states was investigated at length.
One hundred and thirteen participants were subjected to these stimuli and provided facial EMG.
A set of 16 features based on the amplitude, frequency, predictability, and variability of signals was defined and classified using a support vector machine (SVM).
RESULTS: We observed highly accurate classification rates based on the combined corrugator and zygomaticus EMG, ranging from 75.69% to 100.00% for the baseline and five affective states (0VLA, PVHA, PVLA, NVHA, and NVLA) in all individuals.
There were significant differences in classification rate accuracy between senior and young adults, but there was no significant difference between female and male participants.
CONCLUSION: Our research provides robust evidences for recognition of intensive valence and arousal affective states in young and senior adults.
These findings contribute to the successful future application of facial EMG for identifying user affective states in human machine interaction (HMI) or companion robotic systems (CRS).

27539030

BACKGROUND: Substantial evidence shows that physical activities of daily living are positively correlated with affective states in middle-aged and older adults.
However, people's physical activity decreases when they grow older, and conditions that enhance older individuals' physical activities of daily living are not well understood.
PURPOSE: This study investigated need satisfaction (competence, relatedness, and autonomy) and its moderating effect on the within-subject relation between physical activities of daily living and three dimensions of affective states (valence, energetic arousal, and calmness) based on an ambulatory assessment that used activity-triggered e-diaries.
METHOD: The physical activities of daily living of 68 adults aged 50+ (mean age = 60.1 +/- 7.1) were measured objectively for three consecutive days, and need satisfaction and affective states were assessed as a function of the amount of physical activity during the preceding 10 min before the affect measurement (in activity-triggered e-diaries).
Hierarchical multilevel analyses were performed.
RESULTS: Need satisfaction was significantly and positively correlated with the three dimensions of affective states.
Further, physical activities of daily living were significantly associated with energetic arousal and calmness, but not valence.
However, when physical activities of daily living were more autonomously regulated, the association of physical activities of daily living and valence became significant and positive.
CONCLUSION: The findings regarding the significant moderating effects of need satisfaction are crucial for interventions aiming to improve the health-enhancing effects of physical activity in adults aged 50+.
Positive feelings owing to physical activities in daily living depend on the extent that psychological needs are satisfied.

27708602

Despite the well-documented positive effect of exercise on health outcomes, most people do not succeed in exercising regularly.
In addition to several other influences, affective states seem to support exercise participation.
Associations between exercise and affect have been shown in the laboratory.
However, the dynamic relation between affect and exercise in daily life is not yet well-understood.
The objective of this study was to investigate the bi-directional effect of momentary affective states on naturally occurring exercise and vice versa in healthy participants in real-life environments by applying an ecological momentary assessment design.
We hypothesized that (1) exercise duration is positively associated with affective states on a day level, (2) affective states in the morning predict subsequent exercise duration, and (3) exercise duration predicts affective states in the evening on that respective day.
Data from N = 60 students aged between 19 and 32 years were analyzed.
Affect and exercise duration were assessed daily over a period of 20 days via an electronic diary.
Multilevel analysis revealed that positive affective valence was positively associated with exercise duration (p = 0.003) on a day level.
In addition, the more the participants exercised that respective day, the better and more content they felt in the evening (p = 0.009).
Energetic arousal in the morning significantly predicted subsequent exercise duration (p = 0.045).
The findings indicate that it would be worthwhile to focus more on within-subject analyses when analyzing the dynamic relation between affect and exercise.
Furthermore, affective states should be taken into account in creating effective interventions to foster exercise behavior and enhance maintenance.

26996254

From direct observations, facial, vocal, gestural, physiological, and central nervous signals, estimating human affective states through computational models such as multivariate linear-regression analysis, support vector regression, and artificial neural network, have been proposed in the past decade.
In these models, linear models are generally lack of precision because of ignoring intrinsic nonlinearities of complex psychophysiological processes; and nonlinear models commonly adopt complicated algorithms.
To improve accuracy and simplify model, we introduce a new computational modeling method named as higher-order multivariable polynomial regression to estimate human affective states.
The study employs standardized pictures in the International Affective Picture System to induce thirty subjects' affective states, and obtains pure affective patterns of skin conductance as input variables to the higher-order multivariable polynomial model for predicting affective valence and arousal.
Experimental results show that our method is able to obtain efficient correlation coefficients of 0.98 and 0.96 for estimation of affective valence and arousal, respectively.
Moreover, the method may provide certain indirect evidences that valence and arousal have their brain's motivational circuit origins.
Thus, the proposed method can serve as a novel one for efficiently estimating human affective states.

21244540

This study examined a two-dimensional approach to assessing affective states among good and poor sleepers using the self-assessment manikin (SAM), a brief non-verbal self-report measure of affective states with separate ratings of valence and arousal.
A sample of 286 undergraduate students completed the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) and the SAM.
Participants were classified post hoc as either good (PSQI </= 5) or poor sleepers (PSQI > 5) using the PSQI and used the SAM to rate their current affective states (day) and their affective state at bedtime (night) the previous night.
Compared to good sleepers, poor sleepers reported more negative affect and arousal at night and more negative affect during the day.
Among poor sleepers, lower sleep quality and shorter sleep duration on the components of the PSQI were associated with more negative daytime valence.
Among good sleepers, higher scores on the sleep medication and daytime dysfunction components of the PSQI were associated with more negative daytime valence.
These findings indicate that the SAM appears to detect differences between good and poor sleepers on both valence and arousal of current daytime and retrospective night-time emotional states.
This approach could be useful for the assessment of affective states related to sleep disturbance.

23596426

Regularly conducted exercise programs effectively influence affective states.
Studies suggest that this is also true for short bouts of physical activity (PA) of 10 min or less.
Accordingly, everyday life activities of short duration might be used to regulate affective states.
However, this association has rarely been studied in reference to unstructured activities in ongoing real-life situations.
The current study examined the influence of various everyday life activities on three dimensions of mood (valence, calmness, energetic arousal) in a predominantly inactive sample.
Ambulatory Assessment (AA) was used to investigate the association between actual PA and affective states during the course of 1 day.
Seventy-seven students ages 19-30 participated in the study.
PA was assessed with accelerometers, and affective state assessments were conducted hourly using an e-diary with a six-item mood scale that was specially designed for AA.
Multilevel analyses indicated that the mood dimensions energetic arousal (p = 0.001) and valence (p = 0.005) were positively influenced by the intensity of the activity carried out in the 10-min prior to the assessment.
As their activity increased, the participants' positive feelings and energetic arousal increased.
However, the students' calmness was not affected by their activity levels.
The findings highlight the importance of integrating short activity intervals of 10 min or less into everyday life routines to improve affective states.

21517150

Friedman and Forster (2010) reviewed an extensive program of research that was consistent with the view that positive affective states broaden, whereas negative affective states narrow, the scope of attention.
We applaud their creative investigations into these important psychological questions and appreciate their thorough review.
However, recent evidence strongly suggests that the conclusions drawn by Friedman and Forster need to be tempered, for the recent evidence suggests that motivational intensity rather than affective valence causes the modulations of attentional tuning.
That is, affective states of low motivational intensity (e.g., sadness, postgoal positive affect) broaden attention, whereas affective states of high motivational intensity (e.g., disgust, pregoal positive affect) narrow attention.
Our viewpoint is that attentional narrowing occurs during affective states of high motivational intensity to aid organisms in acquiring desirable objects and avoiding aversive ones.
Attentional broadening occurs during affective states of low motivational intensity to open organisms to new opportunities.

29340251

Although people generally feel more positive and more energetic in the aftermath of exercise than before, longitudinal research on how exercise relates to within-person fluctuations in affect over the course of everyday life is still relatively limited.
One constraint on doing such research is the need to provide participants with accelerometers to objectively record their exercise, and pagers to capture affective reports.
We aimed to develop a methodology for studying affect and exercise using only technology that participants already possess, namely GPS running watches and smartphones.
Using this methodology, we aimed to characterize within-individual fluctuations in affective valence and arousal in relation to bouts of exercise, and explore possible moderators of these fluctuations.
We recruited a sample of 38 recreational runners.
Participants provided daily affective reports for six weeks using their smartphones.
Information on their runs was harvested from their own GPS devices via an online platform for athletes.
Average valence and arousal were higher on days when the person had run than on the next day, and higher the day after a run than on the days after that.
Over the course of the day of a run, valence and arousal declined significantly as the time since the run increased.
Physically fitter participants had more positive valence overall, and this was particularly true when they had not run recently.
There was some evidence of higher-dose (i.e., longer and faster) runs being associated with lower arousal on the next and subsequent days.
Gender did not moderate associations between running and valence or arousal.
Our study demonstrated the potential for studying the associations between affect and exercise in a way that is precise, undemanding for participants, and convenient for researchers, using technologies that participants already own and use.

26377553

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that older adults show positive affects after participating in exercise bouts.
However, it is less clear, if and how physical activities in daily living enhance affective states, too.
This is dissatisfying, as most of older adults' physical activities are part of their daily living.
To answer these questions we used activity-triggered e-diaries to investigate the within-subject effects of physical activity on three dimensions of affective states (valence, energetic arousal, calmness) during everyday life.
METHODS: Older adults (N = 74) between 50 and 70 years took part in the study during three consecutive days.
Physical activity in daily living was objectively assessed using accelerometers.
Affects were measured 10 min after a study participant surpassed a predefined threshold for activity or inactivity.
The participants were prompted by an acoustic signal to assess their momentary affective states on an e-diary.
Data were analyzed with hierarchical multilevel analyses.
RESULTS: Whenever older individuals were more physically active, they felt more energized (energetic arousal) and agitated (calmness).
However, they did not feel better (valence).
Interestingly, body mass index (BMI) and valence were associated in a significant cross-level interaction.
BMI acts as a moderating variable in the way that lower BMI scores were associated with higher levels of valence scores after being physically active.
CONCLUSIONS: The innovative ambulatory assessment used here affords an interesting insight to the affective effects of daily activity of older adults.
These effects are no simple and no linear ones, i.e., physical activity is not associated with positive affects per se as shown several times in experimental studies with single activity bouts.
Rather there is a differentiating association seen as an enhanced feeling of energy and agitation, which is not accompanied by a better feeling.
Socio-emotional selectivity theory may support the finding that older individuals are emotionally more stable during their day-to-day life, which might explain the non-significant effect on the affect dimension valence.

23346064

Multiple studies suggest that physical activity causes positive affective reactions and reduces depressive mood.
However, studies and interventions focused mostly on structured activity programs, but rarely on actual physical activity (aPA) in daily life.
Furthermore, they seldom account for the context in which the aPA occur (e.g., work, leisure).
Using a prospective, real-time assessment design (ambulatory assessment), we investigated the effects of aPA on affective states (valence, energetic arousal, calmness) in real-time during everyday life while controlling for the context.
Eighty-seven undergraduates students (Age: M = 24.6; SD = 3.2, females: 54%) participated in this study.
aPA was assessed through accelerometers during 24.
Palmtop devices prompted subjects approximately every 45 min during a 14-h daytime period to assess their affective states and the context.
We analyzed within- and between-person effects with hierarchical modeling (HLM 6.0).
Multilevel analyses revealed that both aPA and context influenced subsequent affective states.
The interaction of aPA and context did predict energetic arousal only.
State levels of affects did not differ between men and women.
For both men and women, aPA in everyday life has an effect on individual's affective states.
For valence and calmness, it seems to be independent of the context in which the aPA occur.
For energetic arousal, men reported to have lower feelings of energy and women reported to have more feelings of energy during leisure time compared to working episodes.

27242643

Several interventions aiming to enhance physical activity in everyday life showed mixed effects.
Affective constructs are thought to potentially support health behavior change.
However, little is known about within-subject associations between momentary affect and subsequent physical activity in everyday life.
This study analyzed the extent to which three dimensions of affective states (valence, calmness, and energetic arousal) were associated with different components of daily activity trajectories.
Sixty-five undergraduates' students (Age: M = 24.6; SD = 3.2; females: 57%) participated in this study.
Physical activity was assessed objectively through accelerometers during 24.
Affective states assessments were conducted randomly every 45 min using an e-diary with a six-item mood scale that was especially designed for ambulatory assessment.
We conducted three-level multi-level analyses to investigate the extent to which momentary affect accounted for momentary volume, prospective trends, and stability vs. fluctuation of physical activity in everyday life.
All three affect dimensions were significantly associated with momentary activity volumes and prospective trends over 45 min periods.
Physical activity didn't fluctuate freely, but featured significant autocorrelation across repeated measurements, suggesting some stability of physical activity across 5-min assessments.
After adjusting for the autoregressive structure in physical activity assessments, only energetic arousal remained a significant predictor.
Feeling energized and awake was associated with an increased momentary volume of activity and initially smaller but gradually growing decreases in subsequent activity within the subsequent 45 min.
Although not related to trends in physical activity, higher valence predicted lower stability in physical activity across subsequent 45 min, suggesting more short-term fluctuations in daily activity the more participants reported positive affective valence.
The current analyses afford interesting insight into within-subject associations between momentary affect and activity-trajectories in everyday life.
Energetic arousal emerged as the only meaningful predictor of physical activity in daily life after adjusting for autoregression.
A significant effect of valence on short-term activity fluctuations might indicate that activity interventions would benefit from taking into account enhancement of positive affective valence in everyday life.
Moments of enhanced valence may scaffold attempts helping inactive people to get started with daily activities and overcome periods of inactivity in everyday life.

21801839

Brain activity was monitored while participants viewed picture sets that reflected high or low levels of arousal and positive, neutral, or negative valence.
Pictures within a set were presented rapidly in an incidental viewing task while fMRI data were collected.
The primary purpose of the study was to determine if multi-voxel pattern analysis could be used within and between participants to predict valence, arousal and combined affective states elicited by pictures based on distributed patterns of whole brain activity.
A secondary purpose was to determine if distributed patterns of whole brain activity can be used to derive a lower dimensional representation of affective states consistent with behavioral data.
Results demonstrated above chance prediction of valence, arousal and affective states that was robust across a wide range of number of voxels used in prediction.
Additionally, individual differences multidimensional scaling based on fMRI data clearly separated valence and arousal levels and was consistent with a circumplex model of affective states.

28089759

BACKGROUND: Nonhuman primates (NHPs) are a valuable research model because of their behavioral, physiological and neuroanatomical similarities to humans.
In the absence of language, autonomic activity can provide crucial information about cognitive and affective states during single-unit recording, inactivation and lesion studies.
Methods standardized for use in humans are not easily adapted to NHPs and detailed guidance has been lacking.
NEW METHOD: We provide guidance for monitoring heart rate and pupil size in the behavioral neurophysiology setting by addressing the methodological issues, pitfalls and solutions for NHP studies.
The methods are based on comparative physiology to establish a rationale for each solution.
We include examples from both electrophysiological and lesion studies.
RESULTS: Single-unit recording, pupil responses and heart rate changes represent a range of decreasing temporal resolution, a characteristic that impacts experimental design and analysis.
We demonstrate the unexpected result that autonomic measures acquired before and after amygdala lesions are comparable despite disruption of normal autonomic function.
COMPARISON WITH EXISTING METHODS: Species and study design differences can render standard techniques used in human studies inappropriate for NHP studies.
We show how to manage data from small groups typical of NHP studies, data from the short behavioral trials typical of neurophysiological studies, issues associated with longitudinal studies, and differences in anatomy and physiology.
CONCLUSIONS: Autonomic measurement to infer cognitive and affective states in NHP is neither off-the-shelf nor onerous.
Familiarity with the issues and solutions will broaden the use of autonomic signals in NHP single unit and lesion studies.

28462104

Whether emotion is universal or social is a recurrent issue in the history of emotion study among psychologists.
Some researchers view emotion as a universal construct, and that a large part of emotional experience is biologically based.
However, emotion is not only biologically determined, but is also influenced by the environment.
Therefore, cultural differences exist in some aspects of emotions, one such important aspect of emotion being emotional arousal level.
All affective states are systematically represented as two bipolar dimensions, valence and arousal.
Arousal level of actual and ideal emotions has consistently been found to have cross-cultural differences.
In Western or individualist culture, high arousal emotions are valued and promoted more than low arousal emotions.
Moreover, Westerners experience high arousal emotions more than low arousal emotions.
By contrast, in Eastern or collectivist culture, low arousal emotions are valued more than high arousal emotions.
Moreover, people in the East actually experience and prefer to experience low arousal emotions more than high arousal emotions.
Mechanism of these cross-cultural differences and implications are also discussed.

25309310

Compared to standard laboratory protocols, the measurement of psychophysiological signals in real world experiments poses technical and methodological challenges due to external factors that cannot be directly controlled.
To address this problem, we propose a hybrid approach based on an immersive and human accessible space called the eXperience Induction Machine (XIM), that incorporates the advantages of a laboratory within a life-like setting.
The XIM integrates unobtrusive wearable sensors for the acquisition of psychophysiological signals suitable for ambulatory emotion research.
In this paper, we present results from two different studies conducted to validate the XIM as a general-purpose sensing infrastructure for the study of human affective states under ecologically valid conditions.
In the first investigation, we recorded and classified signals from subjects exposed to pictorial stimuli corresponding to a range of arousal levels, while they were free to walk and gesticulate.
In the second study, we designed an experiment that follows the classical conditioning paradigm, a well-known procedure in the behavioral sciences, with the additional feature that participants were free to move in the physical space, as opposed to similar studies measuring physiological signals in constrained laboratory settings.
Our results indicate that, by using our sensing infrastructure, it is indeed possible to infer human event-elicited affective states through measurements of psychophysiological signals under ecological conditions.

26379609

Previous findings suggest that visual working memory (VWM) preferentially remembers angry looking faces.
However, the meaning of facial actions is construed in relation to context.
To date, there are no studies investigating the role of perceiver-based context when processing emotional cues in VWM.
To explore the influence of affective context on VWM for faces, we conducted two experiments using both a VWM task for emotionally expressive faces and a mood induction procedure.
Affective context was manipulated by unpleasant (Experiment 1) and pleasant (Experiment 2) IAPS pictures in order to induce an affect high in motivational intensity (defensive or appetitive, respectively) compared to a low arousal control condition.
Results indicated specifically increased sensitivity of VWM for angry looking faces in the neutral condition.
Enhanced VWM for angry faces was prevented by inducing affects of high motivational intensity.
In both experiments, affective states led to a switch from specific enhancement of angry expressions in VWM to an equally sensitive representation of all emotional expressions.
Our findings demonstrate that emotional expressions are of different behavioral relevance for the receiver depending on the affective context, supporting a functional organization of VWM along with flexible resource allocation.
In VWM, stimulus processing adjusts to situational requirements and transitions from a specifically prioritizing default mode in predictable environments to a sensitive, hypervigilant mode in exposure to emotional events.

26487403

Animal training relies heavily on an understanding of species-specific behaviour as it integrates with operant conditioning principles.
Following on from recent studies showing that affective states and arousal levels may correlate with behavioural outcomes, we explore the contribution of both affective state and arousal in behavioural responses to operant conditioning.
This paper provides a framework for assessing how affective state and arousal may influence the efficacy of operant training methods.
It provides a series of three-dimensional conceptual graphs as exemplars to describing putative influences of both affective state and arousal on the likelihood of dogs and horses performing commonly desired behaviours.
These graphs are referred to as response landscapes, and they highlight the flexibility available for improving training efficacy and the likely need for different approaches to suit animals in different affective states and at various levels of arousal.
Knowledge gaps are discussed and suggestions made for bridging them.

25570122

Human emotion recognition (HER) allows the assessment of an affective state of a subject.
Until recently, such emotional states were described in terms of discrete emotions, like happiness or contempt.
In order to cover a high range of emotions, researchers in the field have introduced different dimensional spaces for emotion description that allow the characterization of affective states in terms of several variables or dimensions that measure distinct aspects of the emotion.
One of the most common of such dimensional spaces is the bidimensional Arousal/Valence space.
To the best of our knowledge, all HER systems so far have modelled independently, the dimensions in these dimensional spaces.
In this paper, we study the effect of modelling the output dimensions simultaneously and show experimentally the advantages in modeling them in this way.
We consider a multimodal approach by including features from the Electroencephalogram and a few physiological signals.
For modelling the multiple outputs, we employ a multiple output regressor based on support vector machines.
We also include an stage of feature selection that is developed within an embedded approach known as Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE), proposed initially for SVM.
The results show that several features can be eliminated using the multiple output support vector regressor with RFE without affecting the performance of the regressor.
From the analysis of the features selected in smaller subsets via RFE, it can be observed that the signals that are more informative into the arousal and valence space discrimination are the EEG, Electrooculogram/Electromiogram (EOG/EMG) and the Galvanic Skin Response (GSR).

23534888

Persistent genital arousal disorder (PGAD) is a relatively unknown clinical condition affecting several women.
Moral standards, as well as conservative beliefs regarding sexuality, are believed to be involved in the etiology and maintenance of this syndrome.
Nevertheless, there are no consistent data on the content of the beliefs system presented by these women.
The aim of this study was to characterize the cognitive and emotional style of women reporting PGAD.
More precisely, the content of sexual beliefs, thoughts, and emotions during sexual intercourse was explored.
Forty-three women presenting PGAD and 42 controls responded to a web survey.
This study was cross-cultural in nature and women worldwide (over 18 years old) were asked to participate.
Participants answered the following online questionnaires: Sexual Dysfunctional Beliefs Questionnaire, Sexual Modes Questionnaire, Positive and Negative Affect Schedule, and Brief Symptom Inventory.
Additionally, participants responded to a checklist assessing the presence and frequency of PGAD symptoms.
After controlling for sociodemographic characteristics and psychopathology, findings showed that women reporting PGAD symptoms presented significantly more dysfunctional sexual beliefs (e.g., sexual conservatism, sexual desire as a sin), as well as more negative thoughts (e.g., thoughts of sexual abuse and of lack of partner's affection) and dysfunctional affective states (more negative and less positive affect) during sexual activity than non-PGAD women.
Notwithstanding the impact of neurophysiological determinants in the etiology of this syndrome, results support the psychological conceptualization of PGAD and highlight the role of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for PGAD symptomatology.
More specifically, cognitive and behavioral strategies would be aimed at targeting maladaptive sexual beliefs and thoughts, as well as regulating negative affective states resulting from a dysfunctional cognitive style regarding sexuality.
In all, CBT in association with a medical/pharmacological approach, could be clinically relevant in the management of PGAD.

19923040

In this paper, time, frequency, and time-frequency features derived from thermal infrared data are used to discriminate between self-reported affective states of an individual in response to visual stimuli drawn from the International Affective Pictures System.
A total of six binary classification tasks were examined to distinguish baseline and affect states.
Affect states were determined from subject-reported levels of arousal and valence.
Mean adjusted accuracies of 70% to 80% were achieved for the baseline classifications tasks.
Classification accuracies between high and low ratings of arousal and valence were between 50% and 60%, respectively.
Our analysis showed that facial thermal infrared imaging data of baseline and other affective states may be separable.
The results of this study suggest that classification of facial thermal infrared imaging data coupled with affect models can be used to provide information about an individual's affective state for potential use as a passive communication pathway.

30296909

Emotions are predicted to influence judgement and decision-making across a range of performance contexts.
This experiment tested whether motivational-general arousal imagery can improve the decision-making performance of elite endurance cyclists.
In total, 54 cyclists (38 men, 16 women) were assigned to either a positive imagery condition (where positive images associated with the affective experience of winning were encouraged) or a negative imagery condition (where negative images associated with poor performance were encouraged).
The cyclists were read one of two scripts designed to elicit positive or negative images during a 20-min maximal sustainable interval on a cycle ergometer.
A decision-making task (colour-word match Stroop) was performed before and immediately after the maximal sustainable power interval.
Results showed that the manipulation was successful with cyclists in the positive imagery condition reporting more positive affective states (higher levels of happiness and lower levels of dejection) than those in the negative imagery condition.
However, there was no significant difference between the two groups in their decision-making performance under physiological duress.
These findings indicate that while motivational-general arousal imagery might be a useful method to induce positive emotions during exercise, it is unlikely to improve the decision-making performance of cyclists in performance-relevant conditions.

22216233

BACKGROUND: Based on introspectionist, semantic, and psychophysiological experimental frameworks, it has long been assumed that all affective states derive from two independent basic dimensions, valence and arousal.
However, until now, no study has investigated whether valence and arousal are also dissociable at the level of affect-related changes in cognitive processing.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We examined how changes in both valence (negative vs. positive) and arousal (low vs. high) influence performance in tasks requiring executive control because recent research indicates that two dissociable cognitive components are involved in the regulation of task performance: amount of current control (i.e., strength of filtering goal-irrelevant signals) and control adaptation (i.e., strength of maintaining current goals over time).
Using a visual pop-out distractor task, we found that control is exclusively modulated by arousal because interference by goal-irrelevant signals was largest in high arousal states, independently of valence.
By contrast, control adaptation is exclusively modulated by valence because the increase in control after trials in which goal-irrelevant signals were present was largest in negative states, independent of arousal.
A Monte Carlo simulation revealed that differential effects of two experimental factors on control and control adaptation can be dissociated if there is no correlation between empirical interference and conflict-driven modulation of interference, which was the case in the present data.
Consequently, the observed effects of valence and arousal on adaptive executive control are indeed dissociable.
These findings indicate that affective influences on cognitive processes can be driven by independent effects of variations in valence and arousal, which may resolve several heterogeneous findings observed in previous studies on affect-cognition interactions.

25862928

Insight into the emotional lives of animals is of utmost importance to the welfare of the billions of animals in our care, yet little is known about how to measure these states.
Scientific understanding of how to measure and interpret positive emotional states is particularly lacking, although recent years have seen a notable increase in such studies.
This study explored whether the percentage of visible eye whites is a valid measure of a low arousal, positive emotional state in dairy cows (Bos taurus), by using stroking as the positive stimulus.
Thirteen dairy cows were studied over a period of two months, and a total of 372 full 15minute focal observations were performed.
Each focal observation comprised three 5minute phases: pre-stroking (baseline), stroking (stimulus), and post-stroking (post-stimulus), and the focal cow's behaviours were recorded throughout each observation, and the focal eye was filmed for later analysis.
Following data collection we calculated the percentage of visible eye white at nine pre-determined measurement points throughout each focal observation.
The eye white data were analysed using the one-way repeated measures ANOVA test.
The percentage of visible eye white dropped during stroking compared with during both the pre-stroking and post-stroking phases (ANOVA: F1.242, 14.9=4.32, P=0.025).
The behaviours were analysed using Friedman's ANOVA and Wilcoxon's signed-rank test.
Behaviours known to be associated with positive emotions in cows were performed during the stroking phase of the focal observation, supporting the use of stroking as a stimulus to induce a positive, low arousal emotional state.
This study has explored the potential of visible eye whites as a measure of positive emotions and arousal, and our results support previous studies which suggest that eye whites may serve as a dynamic measure of emotion and arousal.

28493755

Mothers and their babies represent one of the closest dyadic units and thus provide a powerful paradigm to examine how affective states are shared, and result in, synchronized physiologic responses between two people.
We recruited mothers and their 12- to 14-month-old infants (Ndyads = 98) to complete a lab study in which mothers were initially separated from their infants and assigned to either a low-arousal positive/relaxation condition, intended to elicit parasympathetic nervous system (PNS) reactivity, or a high-arousal negative/stress task, intended to elicit sympathetic nervous system (SNS) reactivity.
Upon reunion, infants were placed either on their mothers' laps (touch condition) or in a high chair next to the mother (no-touch condition).
We then examined if the babies SNS and/or PNS responses changed from their baseline levels and how the dyads' physiological responses-both PNS and SNS responses-synchronized over time as a function of mothers' affect manipulation and touch condition.
Three noteworthy findings were observed.
First, infants of mothers assigned to the relaxation task showed greater PNS increases and PNS covariation.
Second, infants of mothers assigned to the stress task showed stronger SNS covariation with their mothers over time.
Finally, infants who sat on their mothers' laps (i.e., touch condition) showed stronger SNS covariation than those in the no-touch condition.
Taken together, these results suggest that mothers' affective states-low-arousal positive states as well as high-arousal negative states-can be "caught" by their infants, and that touch can play a critical role in stress contagion (PsycINFO Database Record)

28544868

Although it is possible to observe when another person is having an emotional moment, we also derive information about the affective states of others from what they tell us they are feeling.
In an effort to distill the complexity of affective experience, psychologists routinely focus on a simplified subset of subjective rating scales (i.e., dimensions) that capture considerable variability in reported affect: reported valence (i.e., how good or bad) and reported arousal (e.g., how strong is the emotion you are feeling).
Still, existing theoretical approaches address the basic organization and measurement of these affective dimensions differently.
Some approaches organize affect around the dimensions of bipolar valence and arousal (e.g., the circumplex model), whereas alternative approaches organize affect around the dimensions of unipolar positivity and unipolar negativity (e.g., the bivariate evaluative model).
In this report, we (a) replicate the data structure observed when collected according to the two approaches described above, and reinterpret these data to suggest that the relationship between each pair of affective dimensions is conditional on valence ambiguity, and (b) formalize this structure with a mathematical model depicting a valence ambiguity dimension that decreases in range as arousal decreases (a triangle).
This model captures variability in affective ratings better than alternative approaches, increasing variance explained from ~60% to over 90% without adding parameters.

21352887

It has been suggested that high arousal negative affective states, but not low arousal negative affective states, potentiate the startle response.
Because sadness has generally been studied as a low arousal emotion, it remains unclear whether high arousal sadness would produce startle potentiation to a similar degree as high arousal fear.
To address this issue, 32 participants viewed two sets of 10-min film clips selected to induce two affective states of high subjective arousal (fear, sadness) and a neutral state of low subjective arousal, while the eyeblink startle response associated with brief noise bursts was assessed using orbicularis oculi EMG.
Larger blink magnitude was found for fearful than for sad or neutral clips.
Implications for conceptualizing sadness are discussed.

27598534

Recent research has demonstrated that affective states elicited by viewing pictures varying in valence and arousal are identifiable from whole brain activation patterns observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
Identification of affective states from more naturalistic stimuli has clinical relevance, but the feasibility of identifying these states on an individual trial basis from fMRI data elicited by dynamic multimodal stimuli is unclear.
The goal of this study was to determine whether affective states can be similarly identified when participants view dynamic naturalistic audiovisual stimuli.
Eleven participants viewed 5s audiovisual clips in a passive viewing task in the scanner.
Valence and arousal for individual trials were identified both within and across participants based on distributed patterns of activity in areas selectively responsive to audiovisual naturalistic stimuli while controlling for lower level features of the stimuli.
In addition, the brain regions identified by searchlight analyses to represent valence and arousal were consistent with previously identified regions associated with emotion processing.
These findings extend previous results on the distributed representation of affect to multimodal dynamic stimuli.

30624745

Introduction: Most adolescent smokers report a desire to quit, and many have made several unsuccessful quit attempts; however, when adolescents attempt to quit, they often resume smoking quickly.
This ecological study aimed to (1) characterize affective and situational precipitants of smoking lapses among adolescents, and (2) explore the moderating influence of nicotine dependence severity on lapse precipitants.
Methods: Adolescent daily smokers (n=166; ages 14-18 years) completed electronic diaries of cigarettes smoked, craving and affective states, and situational variables on handheld computers in their natural environment for two weeks following an unassisted quit attempt.
On average, adolescents were moderately nicotine dependent (Modified Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire [mFTQ] score=4.9; SD=1.6).
Results: Craving was a significant episodic cue for lapse and stable influence on lapse, relating to 44% and 15% increased odds of lapse, respectively.
High-arousal affective states-regardless of valence-were associated with 12-13% increased odds of lapse.
Low-arousal positive affective states were associated with 17% decreased odds of lapse.
A 1-unit difference in a teen's mFTQ score related to 27% increased odds of lapse, but dependence severity did not moderate proximal lapse influences.
Conclusions: This report provides some of the first ecological data characterizing adolescent smoking lapses following a quit attempt.
As in prior work with teens, lapses were nearly universal and quickly followed the quit attempt.
Specific situational and affective contexts of smoking lapses for adolescents were implicated, indicating the need for cessation interventions to address craving and high-arousal affective states as precipitators of lapse in this high-risk group.
Implications: This report provides some of the first ecological data characterizing smoking lapses among teens attempting to quit smoking on their own.
Like adults, adolescents face many barriers when making quit attempts.
The present work provides ecological data to suggest that the experience of heightened arousal in teens' daily lives interferes with their efforts to quit smoking.
Thus, this work highlights the importance of affective dysregulation, or amplitude of emotional feelings, for teen smoking lapses.
Moment-to-moment fluctuation in craving was also implicated as a dynamic precipitator of smoking lapse in this high-risk group.

25503895

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to verify psychometric properties of the Polish version of the Job-related Affective Well-being Scale (JAWS).
Specifically, theoretical 4-factor structure (based on the dimensions of pleasure and arousal) and reliability of the original - 20-item JAWS (van Katwyk et al., 2000) and the shortened - 12-item (Schaufeli and Van Rhenen, 2006) versions were tested.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Two independent samples were analyzed (police officers, N = 395, and police recruits, N = 202).
The Polish version of the original, 20-item, JAWS was used to measure job-related affective states across the past month (van Katwyk et al., 2000).
This version of JAWS includes 2 dimensions: valence and arousal, which allow to assess 4 categories of emotions: low-arousal positive emotions, high-arousal positive emotions, low-arousal negative emotions and high-arousal negative emotions.
RESULTS: The results of multidimensional scaling analysis showed that the theoretical circumplex model of emotions underlining JAWS was satisfactorily reproduced.
Also the hypothesized 4-factor structure of the Polish version of JAWS was confirmed.
The 12-item version had better fit with the data than the original, 20-item, version, but the best fit was obtained for the even shorter, 8-item version.
This version emerged from a multidimensional scaling of the 12-item version.
Reliabilities of the 20- and 12-item versions were good, with lower values for the 8-item JAWS version.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings confirmed satisfactory psychometric properties of both Polish versions of the Job-related Affective Well-being Scale.
Thus, when both psychometric properties and relevance for cross-cultural comparisons are considered, the 12-item JAWS is recommended as a version of choice.

28458642

Evidence that structured physical activity can help to regulate affective state has spurred interest in identifying associations between unstructured physical activity and affective states during daily life.
The present study examined whether stressful daily life situations that elicit affective arousal also elicit increased physical activity in the form of restless movement.
The study compared the physical activity of professors (n = 25) after presenting a classroom lecture to their physical activity at the same time of day on a non-lecture workday.
The expectation was that lecturing would increase affective arousal, leading to greater restless movement following the lecture compared to the non-lecture control day.
The study assessed subjective arousal to confirm that arousal was higher during the lecture.
The primary outcome measures were actigraphy-measured standing and stepping times and number of steps and posture transitions.
Results indicate that energetic and tense arousal were higher during the lecture than during the control period.
Mean (+/-SE) up time (standing and stepping) for the 1st minute of the 20 minute post-lecture period was double that of the last minute (32.8 +/- 5.73 s to 16.5 +/- 5.41 s), while it remained low throughout the comparison period on the control day (p = 0.01).
Subjects also took more steps (p = 0.006) and engaged in more transitions between sitting and standing (p = 0.02) after the lecture than after the control period.
These results support the conclusion that stressful daily life situations that elicit affective arousal also elicit increased physical activity in the form of restless movement and suggest that affective responses to stressful situations may be important determinants of physical activity during daily life.

27859246

OBJECTIVE: Although research often relies on retrospective affect self-reports, little is known about personality's role in retrospective reports and how these converge or deviate from affect reported in the moment.
This micro-longitudinal study examines personality (Neuroticism, Extraversion) and emotional salience (peak and recent affect) associations with retrospective-momentary affect report discrepancies over different time frames.
METHOD: Participants were 179 adults aged 20-78 (M = 48.7 years; 73.7% Caucasian/White) who each provided up to 60 concurrent affect reports over 10 days, then retrospectively reported overall intensity of each affective state after 1 day and again after 1-2 months.
RESULTS: Multilevel models revealed that individuals retrospectively overreported or underreported various affective states, exhibiting peak associations for high arousal positive and negative affect, recency associations for low arousal positive affect, and distinct personality profiles that strengthened over time.
Individuals high in both Extraversion and Neuroticism exaggerated high arousal positive and negative affect and underreported low arousal positive affect, high Extraversion/low Neuroticism individuals exaggerated high arousal positive affect and underreported low arousal positive affect, and low Extraversion/high Neuroticism individuals exaggerated high and low arousal negative affect.
This study is the first to identify arousal-specific retrospective affect report discrepancies over time and suggests retrospective reports also reflect personality differences in affective self-knowledge.

26365539

Adolescence is a sensitive period for changes in both sleep and affect.
Although past research has assessed the association between affect and sleep among adolescents, few studies have examined both trait (typical) and day-to-day changes in affect, and fewer still have specifically examined negative social evaluative emotions (e.g., embarrassment) in relation to sleep.
Both between- and within-person variations in daily affect were examined in relation to four objectively-measured sleep outcomes (sleep hours; sleep latency; sleep efficiency; and length of wake bouts) among adolescents.
Participants (N = 77 high-school students; 42.9% female; M = 14.37 years) wore an actiwatch and completed daily-diaries for 3 days.
The results of hierarchical linear models (controlling for age, gender, race, ethnicity, parental employment status, income, puberty and caffeine) indicated that negative social evaluative emotions and high-arousal affective experiences generally predicted poor sleep outcomes, whereas low-arousal affective experiences were associated with good sleep outcomes.
Specifically, at the person level, adolescents reporting higher negative social evaluative emotions had shorter average sleep hours, and those experiencing higher anxiety-nervousness had longer wake bouts.
In addition, individuals experiencing more dysphoria (sad, depressed, lonely) had longer average sleep hours and shorter wake bouts, while those experiencing more calmness had shorter sleep latencies.
At the within-person level, individuals had longer sleep latencies following days that they had experienced high-arousal positive affect (e.g., excitement), and had longer wake bouts following days they had experienced more negative social evaluative emotions.
The results highlight the detrimental effects of negative social evaluative emotions and high-arousal affective states for adolescent sleep.

27113096

Pupil size is usually regarded as a passive information channel that provides insight into cognitive and affective states but defies any further control.
However, in a recent study (Ehlers et al 2015) we demonstrate that sympathetic activity indexed by pupil dynamics allows strategic interference by means of simple cognitive techniques.
Utilizing positive/negative imaginings, subjects were able to expand pupil diameter beyond baseline variations; albeit with varying degrees of success and only over brief periods.
The current study provides a comprehensive replication on the basis of considerable changes to the experimental set-up.
Results show that stricter methodological conditions (controlled baseline settings and specified user instructions) strengthen the reported effect, whereas overall performance increases by one standard deviation.
Effects are thereby not restricted to pupillary level.
Parallel recordings of skin conductance changes prove a general enhancement of induced autonomic arousal.
Considering the stability of the results across studies, we conclude that pupil size information exceeds affective monitoring and may constitute an active input channel in human-computer interaction.
Furthermore, since variations in pupil diameter reliably display self-induced changes in sympathetic arousal, the relevance of this parameter is strongly indicated for future approaches in clinical biofeedback.

29305673

Romantic relationships, although increasingly normative during adolescence, also present unique developmental challenges that can portend psychological difficulties.
Underlying these difficulties may be the degree to which daily romantic transactions potentiate fluctuations in negative mood.
The present study examined associations between adolescents' daily romantic relationship experiences and their same-day negative affective states (i.e., fluctuations in high-arousal, aversive mood).
Using a dyadic ecological momentary assessment (EMA) design, this study followed an ethnically and socioeconomically diverse sample of 98 adolescent romantic couples twice weekly for 12 weeks (n = 196 individuals; Mage = 16.74 years, SD = 0.90; 45% Latina/o, 45% White; 55% receiving free or reduced meals).
The results indicated that various daily romantic experiences (e.g., conflict, feelings about the relationship) predicted greater same-day negative affect.
Beyond the effects of these romantic experiences, adolescent couples were also synchronized in their fluctuating negative affective states, evidencing the presence of emotional contagion.
Overall, the findings indicate the salience of romantic relationships in the everyday lives of adolescents.

26339285

Recent investigations emphasized the role of communication features on behavioral trust and reciprocity in economic decision making but no studies have been focused on the effect of communication on affective states in such a context.
Thanks to advanced methods of computational psychometrics, in this study, affective states were deeply examined using simultaneous and synchronized recordings of gazes and psychophysiological signals in 28 female students during an investment game.
Results showed that participants experienced different affective states according to the type of communication (personal versus impersonal).
In particular, participants involved in personal communication felt more relaxed than participants involved in impersonal communication.
Moreover, personal communication influenced reciprocity and participants' perceptions about trust and reciprocity.
Findings were interpreted in the light of the Arousal/Valence Model and self-disclosure process.

30321612

Humans experience emotions every day.
Traditionally, psychology has described emotions through discrete labels (e.g., happy, afraid) or standardized affective dimensions (e.g., valence, arousal), and neuroscience has more recently sought the neurobiological basis of emotions via functional neuroimaging.
However, by treating emotions similarly among everyone, we neglect that emotions are individualized; thus the overall relational structure of an individual's emotion information may be vital in understanding how the brain represents emotions.
Combining behavioral and functional MRI experiments with similarity analyses, we demonstrate that neural activity patterns in the left insula correspond to the multi-dimensional arrangement of individuals' affective spaces, despite interindividual differences, better than to a group-averaged model of affective space, a standardized valence-arousal space, a semantic category space, and a visual similarity space.
This finding suggests that the insula may underlie individual-level affective information processing that is specific to one's own affective states, which offers new opportunities for functional neuroimaging to inform clinical approaches of disorders involving emotion dysregulation.

27250346

Time-sampling methodology was implemented to examine the prospective associations between affect, desire to gamble, and gambling behavior in individuals diagnosed with a mood disorder.
Thirty (9 male, 21 female) adults with a lifetime diagnosis of a depressive or bipolar disorder diagnosis who endorsed current gambling and lifetime gambling harm participated in the present study.
Participants completed electronic diary entries of their current affective state, desire to gamble, and gambling behavior for 30 consecutive days.
Hierarchical linear modelling revealed that affect was not a predictor of gambling behavior.
Instead, affect predicted the desire to gamble, with high levels of sadness and arousal independently predicting an increased desire to gamble.
Desire to gamble predicted actual gambling behavior.
There were no differences across diagnostic groups in terms of gambling motivations at baseline; however, during the 30-day period, participants with bipolar disorder endorsed gambling to cope with negative affect more often than did participants with depressive disorder, whereas those with depressive disorder more often endorsed gambling for social reasons or enhancement of positive affect.
The present findings provide evidence that negative affect is not directly related to actual gambling behavior, and suggest that affective states rather impact the desire to gamble.

23527508

Defining the structural organization of emotions is a central unresolved question in affective science.
In particular, the extent to which autonomic nervous system activity signifies distinct affective states remains controversial.
Most prior research on this topic has used univariate statistical approaches in attempts to classify emotions from psychophysiological data.
In the present study, electrodermal, cardiac, respiratory, and gastric activity, as well as self-report measures were taken from healthy subjects during the experience of fear, anger, sadness, surprise, contentment, and amusement in response to film and music clips.
Information pertaining to affective states present in these response patterns was analyzed using multivariate pattern classification techniques.
Overall accuracy for classifying distinct affective states was 58.0% for autonomic measures and 88.2% for self-report measures, both of which were significantly above chance.
Further, examining the error distribution of classifiers revealed that the dimensions of valence and arousal selectively contributed to decoding emotional states from self-report, whereas a categorical configuration of affective space was evident in both self-report and autonomic measures.
Taken together, these findings extend recent multivariate approaches to study emotion and indicate that pattern classification tools may improve upon univariate approaches to reveal the underlying structure of emotional experience and physiological expression.

======================================================================
Circadian_Rhythms
======================================================================
29986218

As behavior shows a distinct circadian rhythm, it is hypothesized that circadian rhythms based on zebrafish (Danio rerio) behavior responses could be affected by contaminants in this study, and then the behavior strength of zebrafish exposed to 0.005mg/L Cadmium chloride (CdCl2), 0.01mg/L Dibasic Sodium Phosphate (Na2HPO4), 0.002mg/L deltamethrin, and 0.003mg/L atrazine for 6 days is used to illustrate the possibility of behavior circadian rhythms as an indicator in the environmental stress assessment.
Statistical analysis with p<0.01 shows that a clear difference between average values of BS during dark period (AVD) and those during light period (AVL) could be observed, and 24h circadian rhythms do exist in zebrafish behavior responses.
Both BS values and circadian rhythms of zebrafish can be affected in the aspect of periodicity with clear time delay, which were 1h delay in CdCl2, 4h delay in Na2HPO4, 4h delay in deltamethrin, and 1h delay in atrazine.
Behavior circadian rhythms were disturbed according to the repetitive cycles after autocorrelation analysis, and the toxic effects of different chemicals could be reflected by the profiles of the Self-Organizing Map (SOM), which indicated the circadian rhythm disorder in different degrees.
These results deduced from the statistical analysis, autocorrelation and SOM strongly supported that circadian rhythms based on zebrafish BS could be used as an indicator in the environmental stress assessment.

27033596

Endogenous circadian ( approximately 24 h) clocks regulate key physiological and cognitive processes via rhythmic expression of clock genes.
The main circadian pacemaker is the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN).
Mood disorders, including bipolar disorder (BD), are commonly associated with disturbed circadian rhythms.
Dopamine (DA) contributes to mania in BD and has direct impact on clock gene expression.
Therefore, we hypothesized that high levels of DA during episodes of mania contribute to disturbed circadian rhythms in BD.
The mood stabilizer valproic acid (VPA) also affects circadian rhythms.
Thus, we further hypothesized that VPA normalizes circadian disturbances caused by elevated levels of DA.
To test these hypotheses, we examined locomotor rhythms and circadian gene cycling in mice with reduced expression of the dopamine transporter (DAT-KD mice), which results in elevated DA levels and mania-like behavior.
We found that elevated DA signaling lengthened the circadian period of behavioral rhythms in DAT-KD mice and clock gene expression rhythms in SCN explants.
In contrast, we found that VPA shortened circadian period of behavioral rhythms in DAT-KD mice and clock gene expression rhythms in SCN explants, hippocampal cell lines, and human fibroblasts from BD patients.
Thus, DA and VPA have opposing effects on circadian period.
To test whether the impact of VPA on circadian rhythms contributes to its behavioral effects, we fed VPA to DAT-deficient Drosophila with and without functioning circadian clocks.
Consistent with our hypothesis, we found that VPA had potent activity-suppressing effects in hyperactive DAT-deficient flies with intact circadian clocks.
However, these effects were attenuated in DAT-deficient flies in which circadian clocks were disrupted, suggesting that VPA functions partly through the circadian clock to suppress activity.
Here, we provide in vivo and in vitro evidence across species that elevated DA signaling lengthens the circadian period, an effect remediated by VPA treatment.
Hence, VPA may exert beneficial effects on mood by normalizing lengthened circadian rhythm period in subjects with elevated DA resulting from reduced DAT.

27216486

Bipolar disorder (BD) is characterized by depression, mania, and circadian rhythm abnormalities.
Lithium, a treatment for BD stabilizes mood and increases circadian rhythm amplitude.
However, in fibroblasts grown from BD patients, lithium has weak effects on rhythm amplitude compared to healthy controls.
To understand the mechanism by which lithium differentially affects rhythm amplitude in BD cells, we investigated the extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and related signaling molecules linked to BD and circadian rhythms.
In fibroblasts from BD patients, controls and mice, we assessed the contribution of the ERK pathway to lithium-induced circadian rhythm amplification.
Protein analyses revealed low phospho-ERK1/2 (p-ERK) content in fibroblasts from BD patients vs. CONTROLS: Pharmacological inhibition of ERK1/2 by PD98059 attenuated the rhythm amplification effect of lithium, while inhibition of two related kinases, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and P38 did not.
Knockdown of the transcription factors CREB and EGR-1, downstream effectors of ERK1/2, reduced baseline rhythm amplitude, but did not alter rhythm amplification by lithium.
In contrast, ELK-1 knockdown amplified rhythms, an effect that was not increased further by the addition of lithium, suggesting this transcription factor may regulate the effect of lithium on amplitude.
Augmentation of ERK1/2 signaling through DUSP6 knockdown sensitized NIH3T3 cells to rhythm amplification by lithium.
In BD fibroblasts, DUSP6 knockdown reversed the BD rhythm phenotype, restoring the ability of lithium to increase amplitude in these cells.
We conclude that the inability of lithium to regulate circadian rhythms in BD may reflect reduced ERK activity, and signaling through ELK-1.

28449894

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate sleep consolidation and circadian activity rhythms in infants and toddlers with Down syndrome (DS) under light and socially entrained conditions within a familiar setting.
Given previous human and animal data suggesting intact circadian regulation of melatonin across the day and night, it was hypothesized that behavioral indices of circadian rhythmicity would likewise be intact in the sample with DS.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study of 66 infants and young children with DS, aged 5-67 months, and 43 typically developing age-matched controls.
Sleep and measures of circadian robustness or timing were quantified using continuous in-home actigraphy recordings performed over seven days.
Circadian robustness was quantified via time series analysis of rest-activity patterns.
Phase markers of circadian timing were calculated alongside these values.
Sleep efficiency was also estimated based on the actigraphy recordings.
RESULTS: This study provided further evidence that general sleep quality is poor in infants and toddlers with DS, a population that has sleep apnea prevalence as high as 50% during the preschool years.
Despite poor sleep quality, circadian rhythm and phase were preserved in children with DS and displayed similar developmental trajectories in cross-sectional comparisons with a typically developing (TD) cohort.
In line with past work, lower sleep efficiency scores were quantified in the group with DS relative to TD children.
Infants born with DS exhibited the worst sleep fragmentation; however, in both groups, sleep efficiency and consolidation increased across age.
Three circadian phase markers showed that 35% of the recruitment sample with DS was phase-advanced to an earlier morning schedule, suggesting significant within-group variability in the timing of their daily activity rhythms.
CONCLUSIONS: Circadian rhythms of wake and sleep are robust in children born with DS.
The present results suggest that sleep fragmentation and any resultant cognitive deficits are likely not confounded by corresponding deficits in circadian rhythms.

30874451

INTRODUCTION: Circadian rhythms regulate much of gastrointestinal physiology including cell proliferation, motility, digestion, absorption, and electrolyte balance.
Disruption of circadian rhythms can have adverse consequences including the promotion of and/or exacerbation of a wide variety of gastrointestinal disorders and diseases.
Areas covered: In this review, we evaluate some of the many gastrointestinal functions that are regulated by circadian rhythms and how dysregulation of these functions may contribute to disease.
This review also discusses some common gastrointestinal disorders that are known to be influenced by circadian rhythms as well as speculation about the mechanisms by which circadian rhythm disruption promotes dysfunction and disease pathogenesis.
We discuss how knowledge of circadian rhythms and the advent of chrono-nutrition, chrono-pharmacology, and chrono-therapeutics might influence clinical practice.
Expert opinion: As our knowledge of circadian biology increases, it may be possible to incorporate strategies that take advantage of circadian rhythms and chronotherapy to prevent and/or treat disease.

30447063

Several immunological functions are dependent on circadian rhythms.
However, there are still relatively few studies about circadian rhythms in neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders (NMOSD) and 2D2 transgenic mice.
We explore whether 2D2 mice have abnormalities in circadian rhythms and the potential underlying molecular mechanism.
We first observed the wheel-running motion of the control and 2D2 mice using wheel-running measurements.
The cytokine levels were also analyzed using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and the results of clock gene expressions in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) were investigated using real-time polymerase chain reaction (real-time PCR).
The wheel-running rhythm in 2D2 mice differed from that of the controls.
The TNF-alpha and IL-10 rhythms were disrupted in 2D2 mice.
Additionally, the rhythm of the clock genes, Per1 and Per2, and expression in the SCN of 2D2 mice were also changed.
The results presented here indicate that alteration of circadian rhythms in 2D2 mice affects behavior and immune function, and the potential molecular mechanism might be the Per1 and Per2 expression disorders in the SCN.
2D2 mice might be a suitable model for studying circadian disruption in NMOSD.

28802827

Heme plays a role in the regulation of the expression of genes related to circadian rhythms and heme metabolism.
In order to identify new heme-regulated proteins, an RNA sequence analysis using mouse NIH3T3 cells treated without or with 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) was performed.
Among the changes observed in the levels of various mRNAs including heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and ALA synthase-1 (ALAS1), a mouse homologue of the plant circadian-regulating protein SRR1, SRR1 domain containing (SRRD) was induced by the ALA treatment.
The expression of SRRD was dependent on heme biosynthesis, and increased the production of heme.
SRRD was expressed under circadian rhythms, and influenced the expression of clock genes including PER2, BMAL1, and CLOCK.
The knockout of SRRD arrested the growth of cells, indicating that SRRD plays roles in heme-regulated circadian rhythms and cell proliferation.

30344415

The etiology of digestive pathologies such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) and cancer is not yet fully understood.
In recent years, several studies have evidenced circadian variations in mechanisms involved in digestive health.
In situations of disturbed circadian rhythms (chronodisruption) where the central clock and the peripheral clocks receive incoherent signals, the synchronicity is lost producing implications for health.
This lack of coordination could alter the tissue function and cause long term damage to the organs.
Life habits such as sleep, physical exercise, social interaction, and feeding times are determinants for stability and integrity of circadian rhythms.
In recent years, experimental and clinical studies have consistently evidenced that the alteration of circadian rhythms is associated with the development of digestive pathologies mainly linked to dismotility or changes in microbiota composition.
Likewise, it seems reasonable to deep into the importance of chronodisruption as a factor that may participate in the development of pathologies such as IBS, IBD and digestive cancers.
Moreover, life habits respecting circadian rhythms should be promoted for the prevention of these diseases.
Further studies will allow us a better understanding of the mechanisms acting at molecular level, and the development of new therapeutic targets.

26930624

Lithium is widely used as a treatment of bipolar disorder, a neuropsychiatric disorder associated with disrupted circadian rhythms.
Lithium is known to lengthen period and increase amplitude of circadian rhythms.
One possible pathway for these effects involves inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta), which regulates degradation of CRY2, a canonical clock protein determining circadian period.
CRY1 is also known to play important roles in regulating circadian period and phase, although there is no evidence that it is similarly phosphorylated by GSK-3beta.
In this paper, we tested the hypothesis that lithium affects circadian rhythms through CRYs.
We cultured fibroblasts and slices of the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the master circadian pacemaker of the brain, from Cry1-/-, Cry2-/-, or wild-type (WT) mice bearing the PER2:LUC circadian reporter.
Lithium was applied in the culture medium, and circadian rhythms of PER2 expression were measured.
In WT and Cry2-/- fibroblasts, 10mM lithium increased PER2 expression and rhythm amplitude but not period, and 1mM lithium did not affect either period or amplitude.
In non-rhythmic Cry1-/- fibroblasts, 10mM lithium increased PER2 expression.
In SCN slices, 1mM lithium lengthened period approximately 1h in all genotypes, but did not affect amplitude except in Cry2-/- SCN.
Thus, the amplitude-enhancing effect of lithium in WT fibroblasts was unaffected by Cry2 knockout and occurred in the absence of period-lengthening, whereas the period-lengthening effect of lithium in WT SCN was unaffected by Cry1 or Cry2 knockout and occurred in the absence of rhythm amplification, suggesting that these two effects of lithium on circadian rhythms are independent of CRYs and of each other.

28360128

The advantages of the model organism Drosophila melanogaster, including low genetic redundancy, functional simplicity, and the ability to conduct large-scale genetic screens, have been essential for understanding the molecular nature of circadian ( approximately 24 hr) rhythms, and continue to be valuable in discovering novel regulators of circadian rhythms and sleep.
In this review, we discuss the current understanding of these interrelated biological processes in Drosophila and the wider implications of this research.
Clock genes period and timeless were first discovered in large-scale Drosophila genetic screens developed in the 1970s.
Feedback of period and timeless on their own transcription forms the core of the molecular clock, and accurately timed expression, localization, post-transcriptional modification, and function of these genes is thought to be critical for maintaining the circadian cycle.
Regulators, including several phosphatases and kinases, act on different steps of this feedback loop to ensure strong and accurately timed rhythms.
Approximately 150 neurons in the fly brain that contain the core components of the molecular clock act together to translate this intracellular cycling into rhythmic behavior.
We discuss how different groups of clock neurons serve different functions in allowing clocks to entrain to environmental cues, driving behavioral outputs at different times of day, and allowing flexible behavioral responses in different environmental conditions.
The neuropeptide PDF provides an important signal thought to synchronize clock neurons, although the details of how PDF accomplishes this function are still being explored.
Secreted signals from clock neurons also influence rhythms in other tissues.
SLEEP is, in part, regulated by the circadian clock, which ensures appropriate timing of sleep, but the amount and quality of sleep are also determined by other mechanisms that ensure a homeostatic balance between sleep and wake.
Flies have been useful for identifying a large set of genes, molecules, and neuroanatomic loci important for regulating sleep amount.
Conserved aspects of sleep regulation in flies and mammals include wake-promoting roles for catecholamine neurotransmitters and involvement of hypothalamus-like regions, although other neuroanatomic regions implicated in sleep in flies have less clear parallels.
Sleep is also subject to regulation by factors such as food availability, stress, and social environment.
We are beginning to understand how the identified molecules and neurons interact with each other, and with the environment, to regulate sleep.
Drosophila researchers can also take advantage of increasing mechanistic understanding of other behaviors, such as learning and memory, courtship, and aggression, to understand how sleep loss impacts these behaviors.
Flies thus remain a valuable tool for both discovery of novel molecules and deep mechanistic understanding of sleep and circadian rhythms.

24853393

In the healthy state, both circadian rhythm and mood are stable against perturbations, yet they are capable of adjusting to altered internal cues or ongoing changes in external conditions.
The dual demands of stability and flexibility are met by the collective properties of complex neural networks.
Disruption of this balance underlies both circadian rhythm abnormality and mood disorders.
However, we do not fully understand the network properties that govern the crosstalk between the circadian system and mood regulation.
This puzzle reflects a challenge at the center of neurobiology, and its solution requires the successful integration of existing data across all levels of neural organization, from molecules, cells, circuits, network dynamics, to integrated mental function.
This essay discusses several open questions confronting the cross-level synthesis, and proposes that circadian regulation, and its role in mood, stands as a uniquely tractable system to study the causal mechanisms of neural adaptation.
Also watch the Video Abstract.
Editor's suggested further reading in BioEssays Major depressive disorder: A loss of circadian synchrony Abstract.

26476274

UNLABELLED: Bipolar disorder (BD) is associated with mood episodes and low amplitude circadian rhythms.
Previously, we demonstrated that fibroblasts grown from BD patients show weaker amplification of circadian rhythms by lithium compared to control cells.
Since calcium signals impact upon the circadian clock, and L-type calcium channels (LTCC) have emerged as genetic risk factors for BD, we examined whether loss of function in LTCCs accounts for the attenuated response to lithium in BD cells.
We used fluorescent dyes to measure Ca(2+) changes in BD and control fibroblasts after lithium treatment, and bioluminescent reporters to measure Per2::luc rhythms in fibroblasts from BD patients, human controls, and mice while pharmacologically or genetically manipulating calcium channels.
Longitudinal expression of LTCC genes (CACNA1C, CACNA1D and CACNB3) was then measured over 12-24 h in BD and control cells.
Our results indicate that independently of LTCCs, lithium stimulated intracellular Ca(2+) less effectively in BD vs. control fibroblasts.
In longitudinal studies, pharmacological inhibition of LTCCs or knockdown of CACNA1A, CACNA1C, CACNA1D and CACNB3 altered circadian rhythm amplitude.
Diltiazem and knockdown of CACNA1C or CACNA1D eliminated lithium's ability to amplify rhythms.
Knockdown of CACNA1A or CACNB3 altered baseline rhythms, but did not affect rhythm amplification by lithium.
In human fibroblasts, CACNA1C genotype predicted the amplitude response to lithium, and the expression profiles of CACNA1C, CACNA1D and CACNB3 were altered in BD vs. CONTROLS: We conclude that in cells from BD patients, calcium signaling is abnormal, and that LTCCs underlie the failure of lithium to amplify circadian rhythms.

30180433

Objective: To explore the developmental characteristics of circadian rhythms in hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis during puberty.
Methods: A total of 1 070 students from Grade 2-3 in 3 primary schools in Ma'anshan city, Anhui province, were selected for physical examination and circadian rhythm of HPA axis checked from 2015 to 2017.
Saliva samples were collected at each of the following three time points: immediately upon wakening, 30 minutes after wakening and bedtime, with the index of circadian rhythm of HPA axis calculated, which including cortisol awake response (CAR), cortisol in puberty priming and diurnal cortisol slope (DCS).
Testicular volume, palpation and visual inspection of breast development were used to assess the state of purbety development on boys and girls.
Information on gender, date of birth, time to fall asleep, wake-up time and weekly physical activity were gathered through questionnaire survey.
Non-parametric test was used to compare the differences of baseline, follow-up period and different adolescent developmental processes of each index on circadian rhythm of HPA axis.
Results: During the period of follow-up program and comparing with the continuous undeveloped group, CAR and the changes of CAR showed significantly increase, both in the puberty priming group and continuous development group, with statistically significant differences (CAR: Z=8.551, 4.680, respectively; P<0.01; the changes of CAR: Z=4.079, 2.700, respectively, P<0.01).
There were no significant differences noticed in CAR and the changes of CAR between puberty priming group or continuous development group.
The area under the curve (AUC) of cortisol in puberty priming group was slightly higher than that in the persistent undeveloped group (Z=2.591, P=0.010).
Both the changes of daily cortisol slope (DCS) in puberty priming group and continuing developed group decreased significantly, when comparing with those in continuous undeveloped group (Z=-2.450, Z=-2.151; all P<0.05).
There was no significant difference noticed in the changes of cortisol in puberty priming and DCS between different puberty development stages (the changes of AUC: chi(2)=2.747, P=0.253; DCS: chi(2)=4.554, P=0.032).
Conclusions: The indexes of circadian rhythm of HPA axis were associated with the development of puberty.
Both the cortisol awakening response and the total amount of diurnal cortisol secretion showed an increase, along with the puberty development.
The change of diurnal cortisol slope declined with the development of puberty.

28674176

Stress plays a critical role in the neurobiology of mood and anxiety disorders.
Sleep and circadian rhythms are affected in many of these conditions.
Here we examined the effects of chronic social defeat stress (CSDS), an ethological form of stress, on sleep and circadian rhythms.
We exposed male mice implanted with wireless telemetry transmitters to a 10 day CSDS regimen known to produce anhedonia (a depressive-like effect) and social avoidance (an anxiety-like effect).
EEG, EMG, body temperature, and locomotor activity data were collected continuously during the CSDS regimen and a 5 day recovery period.
CSDS affected numerous endpoints, including paradoxical sleep (PS) and slow-wave sleep (SWS), as well as the circadian rhythmicity of body temperature and locomotor activity.
The magnitude of the effects increased with repeated stress, and some changes (PS bouts, SWS time, body temperature, locomotor activity) persisted after the CSDS regimen had ended.
CSDS also altered mRNA levels of the circadian rhythm-related gene mPer2 within brain areas that regulate motivation and emotion.
Administration of the kappa-opioid receptor (KOR) antagonist JDTic (30 mg/kg, i.p) before CSDS reduced stress effects on both sleep and circadian rhythms, or hastened their recovery, and attenuated changes in mPer2 Our findings show that CSDS produces persistent disruptions in sleep and circadian rhythmicity, mimicking attributes of stress-related conditions as they appear in humans.
The ability of KOR antagonists to mitigate these disruptions is consistent with previously reported antistress effects.
Studying homologous endpoints across species may facilitate the development of improved treatments for psychiatric illness.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Stress plays a critical role in the neurobiology of mood and anxiety disorders.
We show that chronic social defeat stress in mice produces progressive alterations in sleep and circadian rhythms that resemble features of depression as it appears in humans.
Whereas some of these alterations recover quickly upon cessation of stress, others persist.
Administration of a kappa-opioid receptor (KOR) antagonist reduced stress effects or hastened recovery, consistent with the previously reported antistress effects of this class of agents.
Use of endpoints, such as sleep and circadian rhythm, that are homologous across species will facilitate the implementation of translational studies that better predict clinical outcomes in humans, improve the success of clinical trials, and facilitate the development of more effective therapeutics.

29141950

The in utero environment is inherently rhythmic, with the fetus subjected to circadian changes in temperature, substrates, and various maternal hormones.
Meanwhile, the fetus is developing an endogenous circadian timing system, preparing for life in an external environment where light, food availability, and other environmental factors change predictably and repeatedly every 24.
In humans, there are many situations that can disrupt circadian rhythms, including shift work, international travel, insomnias, and circadian rhythm disorders (e.g., advanced/delayed sleep phase disorder), with a growing consensus that this chronodisruption can have deleterious consequences for an individual's health and well-being.
However, the impact of chronodisruption during pregnancy on the health of both the mother and fetus is not well understood.
In this review, we outline circadian timing system ontogeny in mammals and examine emerging research from animal models demonstrating long-term negative implications for progeny health following maternal chronodisruption during pregnancy.

27908540

In recent years, strong evidence has emerged suggesting that insufficient duration, quality, and/or timing of sleep are associated with cardiovascular disease (CVD), and various mechanisms for this association have been proposed.
Such associations may be related to endophenotypic features of the sleep homeostat and the circadian oscillator, or may be state-like effects of the environment.
Here, we review recent literature on sleep, circadian rhythms and CVD with a specific emphasis on differences between racial/ethnic groups.
We discuss the reported differences, mainly between individuals of European and African descent, in parameters related to sleep (architecture, duration, quality) and circadian rhythms (period length and phase shifting).
We further review racial/ethnic differences in cardiovascular disease and its risk factors, and develop the hypothesis that racial/ethnic health disparities may, to a greater or smaller degree, relate to differences in parameters related to sleep and circadian rhythms.
When humans left Africa some 100,000 years ago, some genetic differences between different races/ethnicities were acquired.
These genetic differences have been proposed as a possible predictor of CVD disparities, but concomitant differences in culture and lifestyle between different groups may equally explain CVD disparities.
We discuss the evidence for genetic and environmental causes of these differences in sleep and circadian rhythms, and their usefulness as health intervention targets.

28332018

Circadian clocks are near universal among organisms and play a key role in coordinating physiological and metabolic functions to anticipate or coincide with predictable daily changes in the physical and social environment.
However, whether circadian rhythms persist and are functionally important during hibernation in all mammals is currently unclear.
We examined whether circadian rhythms of body temperature (T b) persist during multi-day, steady-state torpor and investigated the association between timing of animal emergence, exposure to light, and resumption of activity and T b rhythms in free-living and captive male arctic ground squirrels.
High-resolution (0.02 degrees C) temperature loggers revealed that circadian rhythms of T b were not present during deep torpor in free-living arctic ground squirrels.
Significant circadian rhythms of T b resumed, however, following the resumption of euthermia, but prior to emergence, though rhythms became much more robust coincident with aboveground emergence.
Additionally, squirrels maintained in captivity under conditions of constant darkness spontaneously developed significant circadian rhythms of T b and activity soon after ending torpor.
Exposing animals to a 5-s pulse of light within a week when they ended torpor increased the strength of rhythms.
Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that circadian clock function is inhibited during hibernation in arctic ground squirrels, and we postulate that exposure to external stimuli, such as light in free-living animals, and meals or acute disturbance for captive squirrels, may enhance T b rhythmicity by synchronizing loosely coupled circadian oscillators within the suprachiasmatic nucleus.

29289962

Majority of the physiological processes in the human organism are rhythmic.
The most common are the diurnal changes that repeat roughly every 24 hours, called circadian rhythms.
Circadian rhythms disorders have negative influence on human functioning.
The aim of this article is to present the current understanding of the circadian rhythms physiological role, with particular emphasis on the circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders (CRSWD), principles of their diagnosis and chronobiological therapy.
The guidelines are based on the review of recommendations from the scientific societies involved in sleep medicine and the clinical experiences of the authors.
Researchers participating in the preparation of guidelines were invited by the Polish Sleep Research Society and the Section of Biological Psychiatry of the Polish Psychiatric Association, based on their significant contributions in circadian rhythm research and/or clinical experience in the treatment of such disorders.
Finally, the guidelines were adjusted to the questions and comments given by the members of both Societies.
CRSWD have a significant negative impact on human health and functioning.
Standard methods used to assess CRSWD are sleep diaries and sleep logs, while the actigraphy, when available, should be also used.
The most effective methods of CRSWD treatment are melatonin administration and light therapy.
Behavioral interventions are also recommended.
Afourteen-day period of sleep-wake rhythm assessment in CRSWD enables accurate diagnosis, adequate selection of chronobiological interventions, and planning adequate diurnal timing of their application.
This type of assessment is quite easy, low-cost, and provides valuable indications how to adjust the therapeutic approach to the circadian phase of the particular patient.

30098753

Women often experience sleep disturbances and worsening sleep quality throughout pregnancy and postpartum.
Circadian rhythms are closely linked to sleep problems and mood disorders.
This systematic review provides a summary of studies of circadian rhythms and associated sleep problems and maternal distress, among postpartum women.
Articles were idenitfied through a systematic literature search.
Circadian rhythm disturbances were strongly correlated with depression, social factors and mothers`s exposure to light postpartum.
Future research should include larger, prospective studies as well as randomized controlled trials for measuring effect of circadian rhythm interventions on postpartum mental health outcomes.

30487653

Bipolar disorder (BD) is a serious mood disorder associated with circadian rhythm abnormalities.
Risk for BD is genetically encoded and overlaps with systems that maintain circadian rhythms.
Lithium is an effective mood stabilizer treatment for BD, but only a minority of patients fully respond to monotherapy.
Presently, we hypothesized that lithium-responsive BD patients (Li-R) would show characteristic differences in chronotype and cellular circadian rhythms compared to lithium non-responders (Li-NR).
Selecting patients from a prospective, multi-center, clinical trial of lithium monotherapy, we examined morning vs. evening preference (chronotype) as a dimension of circadian rhythm function in 193 Li-R and Li-NR BD patients.
From a subset of 59 patient donors, we measured circadian rhythms in skin fibroblasts longitudinally over 5 days using a bioluminescent reporter (Per2-luc).
We then estimated circadian rhythm parameters (amplitude, period, phase) and the pharmacological effects of lithium on rhythms in cells from Li-R and Li-NR donors.
Compared to Li-NRs, Li-Rs showed a difference in chronotype, with higher levels of morningness.
Evening chronotype was associated with increased mood symptoms at baseline, including depression, mania, and insomnia.
Cells from Li-Rs were more likely to exhibit a short circadian period, a linear relationship between period and phase, and period shortening effects of lithium.
Common genetic variation in the IP3 signaling pathway may account for some of the individual differences in the effects of lithium on cellular rhythms.
We conclude that circadian rhythms may influence response to lithium in maintenance treatment of BD.

28169087

BACKGROUND: Individuals with psychotic disorders experience disruptions to both the sleep and circadian components of the sleep/wake cycle.
Recent evidence has supported a role of sleep disturbances in emerging psychosis.
However, less is known about how circadian rhythm disruptions may relate to psychosis symptoms and prognosis for adolescents with clinical high-risk (CHR) syndromes.
The present study examines circadian rest/activity rhythms in CHR and healthy control (HC) youth to clarify the relationships among circadian rhythm disturbance, psychosis symptoms, psychosocial functioning, and the longitudinal course of illness.
METHODS: Thirty-four CHR and 32 HC participants were administered a baseline evaluation, which included clinical interviews, 5days of actigraphy, and a sleep/activity diary.
CHR (n=29) participants were re-administered clinical interviews at a 1-year follow-up assessment.
RESULTS: Relative to HC, CHR youth exhibited more fragmented circadian rhythms and later onset of nocturnal rest.
Circadian disturbances (fragmented rhythms, low daily activity) were associated with increased psychotic symptom severity among CHR participants at baseline.
Circadian disruptions (lower daily activity, rhythms that were more fragmented and/or desynchronized with the light/dark cycle) also predicted severity of psychosis symptoms and psychosocial impairment at 1-year follow-up among CHR youth.
CONCLUSIONS: Circadian rhythm disturbances may represent a potential vulnerability marker for emergence of psychosis, and thus, rest/activity rhythm stabilization has promise to inform early-identification and prevention/intervention strategies for CHR youth.
Future studies with longer study designs are necessary to further examine circadian rhythms in the prodromal period and rates of conversion to psychosis among CHR teens.

28777176

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The endogenous circadian rhythms are one of the cardinal processes that control sleep.
They are self-sustaining biological rhythms with a periodicity of approximately 24 hours that may be entrained by external zeitgebers (German for time givers), such as light, exercise, and meal times.
This article discusses the physiology of the circadian rhythms, their relationship to neurologic disease, and the presentation and treatment of circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders.
RECENT FINDINGS: Classic examples of circadian rhythms include cortisol and melatonin secretion, body temperature, and urine volume.
More recently, the impact of circadian rhythm on several neurologic disorders has been investigated, such as the timing of occurrence of epileptic seizures as well as neurobehavioral functioning in dementia.
Further updates include a more in-depth understanding of the symptoms, consequences, and treatment of circadian sleep-wake disorders, which may occur because of extrinsic misalignment with clock time or because of intrinsic dysfunction of the brain.
An example of extrinsic misalignment occurs with jet lag during transmeridian travel or with intrinsic circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders such as advanced or delayed sleep-wake phase disorders.
In advanced sleep-wake phase disorder, which is most common in elderly individuals, sleep onset and morning arousal are undesirably early, leading to impaired evening function with excessive sleepiness and sleep-maintenance insomnia with early morning awakening.
By contrast, delayed sleep-wake phase disorder is characterized by an inability to initiate sleep before the early morning hours, with subsequent delayed rise time, leading to clinical symptoms of severe sleep-onset insomnia coupled with excessive daytime sleepiness in the morning hours, as patients are unable to "sleep in" to attain sufficient sleep quantity.
Irregular sleep-wake rhythm disorder is misentrainment with patches of brief sleep and wakefulness spread throughout the day, leading to unstable sleep and waking behavioral patterns and an entirely idiosyncratic sleep-wake schedule.
SUMMARY: Familiarity with these major circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder phenotypes and their overlap with other neurologic disorders is essential for the neurologist so that clinicians may intervene and improve patient functioning and quality of life.

28514644

The interaction between hormonal circadian rhythms and feeding behaviour is not well understood.
This study aimed to deepen our understanding of mechanisms underlying circadian feeding behaviour in animals, using pigs, Sus scrofa, as a case study.
Pigs show an alternans feeding pattern, that is, a small peak of feed intake at the beginning of the day and a larger peak at the end of the day.
We simulated the feeding behaviour of pigs over a 24h period.
The simulation model contained mechanisms that regulate feeding behaviour of animals, including: processing of feed in the gastrointestinal tract, fluctuation in energy balance, circadian rhythms of melatonin and cortisol and motivational decision-making.
From the interactions between these various processes, feeding patterns (e.g., feed intake, meal frequency, feeding rate) emerge.
These feeding patterns, as well as patterns for the underlying mechanisms (e.g., energy expenditure), fitted empirical data well, indicating that our model contains relevant mechanisms.
The circadian rhythms of cortisol and melatonin explained the alternans pattern of feeding in pigs.
Additionally, the timing and amplitude of cortisol peaks affected the diurnal and nocturnal peaks in feed intake.
Furthermore, our results suggest that circadian rhythms of other hormones, such as leptin and ghrelin, are less important in circadian regulation of feeding behaviour than previously thought.
These results are relevant to animal species with a metabolic and endocrine system similar to that of pigs, such as humans.
Moreover, the modelling approach to understand feeding behaviour can be applied to other animal species.

29496017

We studied circadian rhythms of body temperature and locomotor activity in antelope ground squirrels (Ammospermophilus leucurus) under laboratory conditions of a 12L:12D light-dark cycle and in constant darkness.
Antelope ground squirrels are diurnally active and, exceptionally among ground squirrels and other closely related members of the squirrel family in general, they do not hibernate.
Daily oscillations in body temperature consisted of a rise in temperature during the daytime activity phase of the circadian cycle and a decrease in temperature during the nighttime rest phase.
The body temperature rhythms were robust (71% of maximal strength) with a daily range of oscillation of 4.6 degrees C, a daytime mean of 38.7 degrees C, and a nighttime mean of 34.1 degrees C (24-h overall mean 36.4 degrees C).
The body temperature rhythm persisted in continuous darkness with a free-running period of 24.2h.
This pattern is similar to that of hibernating species of ground squirrels but with a wave form more similar to that of non-hibernating rodents.
Daily oscillations in body temperature were correlated with individual bouts of activity, but daytime temperatures were higher than nighttime temperatures even when comparing short episodes of nocturnal activity that were as intense as diurnal activity.
This suggests that although muscular thermogenesis associated with locomotor activity can modify the level of body temperature, the circadian rhythm of body temperature is not simply a consequence of the circadian rhythm of activity.

25535886

OBJECTIVES: The circadian rhythm of clinical symptoms in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) has been primarily attributed to circadian variations in humoral factors and hormones.
In this study, we investigated circadian rhythms of cellular immunity in RA (CiRA study).
METHODS: Peripheral blood of female postmenopausal patients with active RA (DAS 28 >/= 4.2) (n=5) and female postmenopausal non-RA controls (n=5) was collected every 2 hours for 24 hours and analysed by flow cytometry, cytokine multiplex suspension array and quantitative RT-PCR of clock gene expression in isolated CD14+ monocytes.
Endogenous circadian rhythms of macrophages were investigated by BMAL1-luciferase bioluminescence.
Significance of circadian rhythms was tested by Cosinor analysis.
RESULTS: We found (i) circadian rhythms in the relative frequency of peripheral blood cell populations that were present in postmenopausal non-RA controls but absent in patients with active RA, (ii) circadian rhythms that were absent in non-RA controls but present in patients with RA and (iii) circadian rhythms that were present in both groups but with differences in peak phase or amplitude or amplitude/magnitude.
The circadian rhythm in expression of the clock genes PER2 and PER3 in CD14+ monocytes was lost in patients with RA.
The amplitude of BMAL1-luciferase bioluminescence tended to be lower in patients with RA than in non-RA controls.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that (i) in RA some immune cell populations lose their normal circadian rhythms whereas others establish new 'inflammatory' circadian rhythms and (ii) these findings provide a good basis for further identifying pathophysiological aspects of RA chronobiology with potential therapeutic implications.

28592698

Behavioral circadian rhythms are controlled by multioscillator networks comprising functionally different subgroups of clock neurons.
Studies have demonstrated that molecular clocks in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster are regulated differently in clock neuron subclasses to support their specific functions (Lee et al., 2016; Top et al., 2016).
The nuclear receptor unfulfilled (unf) represents a regulatory node that provides the small ventral lateral neurons (s-LNvs) unique characteristics as the master pacemaker (Beuchle et al., 2012).
We previously showed that UNF interacts with the s-LNv molecular clocks by regulating transcription of the core clock gene period (per) (Jaumouille et al., 2015).
To gain more insight into the mechanisms by which UNF contributes to the functioning of the circadian master pacemaker, we identified UNF target genes using chromatin immunoprecipitation.
Our data demonstrate that a previously uncharacterized gene CG7837, which we termed R and B (Rnb), acts downstream of UNF to regulate the function of the s-LNvs as the master circadian pacemaker.
Mutations and LNv-targeted adult-restricted knockdown of Rnb impair locomotor rhythms.
RNB localizes to the nucleus, and its loss-of-function blunts the molecular rhythms and output rhythms of the s-LNvs, particularly the circadian rhythms in PDF accumulation and axonal arbor remodeling.
These results establish a second pathway by which UNF interacts with the molecular clocks in the s-LNvs and highlight the mechanistic differences in the molecular clockwork within the pacemaker circuit.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Circadian behavior is generated by a pacemaker circuit comprising diverse classes of pacemaker neurons, each of which contains a molecular clock.
In addition to the anatomical and functional diversity, recent studies have shown the mechanistic differences in the molecular clockwork among the pacemaker neurons in Drosophila Here, we identified the molecular characteristics distinguishing the s-LNvs, the master pacemaker of the locomotor rhythms, from other clock neuron subtypes.
We demonstrated that a newly identified gene Rnb is an s-LNv-specific regulator of the molecular clock and essential for the generation of circadian locomotor behavior.
Our results provide additional evidence to the emerging view that the differential regulation of the molecular clocks underlies the functional differences among the pacemaker neuron subgroups.

29610316

Endogenous circadian clocks control 24-h physiological and behavioral rhythms in mammals.
Here, we report a real-time in vivo fluorescence recording system that enables long-term monitoring of circadian rhythms in the brains of freely moving mice.
With a designed reporter of circadian clock gene expression, we tracked robust Cry1 transcription reporter rhythms in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of WT, Cry1(-/-) , and Cry2(-/-) mice in LD (12 h light, 12 h dark) and DD (constant darkness) conditions and verified that signals remained stable for over 6 mo.
Further, we recorded Cry1 transcriptional rhythms in the subparaventricular zone (SPZ) and hippocampal CA1/2 regions of WT mice housed under LD and DD conditions.
By using a Cre-loxP system, we recorded Per2 and Cry1 transcription rhythms specifically in vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) neurons of the SCN.
Finally, we demonstrated the dynamics of Per2 and Cry1 transcriptional rhythms in SCN VIP neurons following an 8-h phase advance in the light/dark cycle.

30172213

BACKGROUND: The present systematic review was aimed at critically summarizing the evidence about interventions focused on circadian rhythms and mood symptoms in seasonal affective disorder (SAD).
METHODS: A systematic search of the electronic databases PUBMED, PsycINFO and Web of Science was conducted according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement.
Original papers reporting data about the effects of treatments on both mood and circadian rhythms disturbances in SAD patients were considered for inclusion.
The quality of the evidence provided by the eligible studies was assessed using the Revised Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool (RoB 2.0) and the Cochrane Risk of Bias in Non-Randomized Studies of Interventions Tool (ROBINS-I).
RESULTS: Forty papers were deemed eligible for the systematic review.
The evidence of treatment outcomes referring to circadian disturbances was not robust.
Despite this, bright light therapy (BLT) demonstrates to phase-advance delayed rhythms and to improve sleep-wake disorders.
As for mood symptoms, both BLT and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) show evidence of efficacy.
The possible connection between improvements of mood symptoms and changes in circadian outcomes seems controversial.
LIMITATIONS: The included studies presented considerable methodological heterogeneity, small sample sizes and non-optimal sample selection.
CONCLUSIONS: The effectiveness of BLT in depressive symptoms and circadian disturbances of SAD was outlined by the present systematic review.
The evidence about other biological and pharmacological treatments, although promising, should be replicated.
A multifactorial etiopathogenesis could explain the heterogeneous clinical presentations of SAD and the complex link between mood and circadian symptoms.

29412982

The timing, duration, and consolidation of sleep result from the interaction of the circadian timing system with a sleep-wake homeostatic process.
When aligned and functioning optimally, this allows wakefulness throughout the day and a long consolidated sleep episode at night.
Mismatch between the desired timing of sleep and the ability to fall and remain asleep is a hallmark of the circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders.
This article discusses changes in circadian regulation of sleep with aging; how age influences the prevalence, diagnosis, and treatment of circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders; and how neurologic diseases in older patients affect circadian rhythms and sleep.

28420965

Circadian rhythms are daily rhythms that regulate many biological processes - from gene transcription to behavior - and a disruption of these rhythms can lead to a myriad of health risks.
Circadian rhythms are entrained by light, and their 24-h oscillation is maintained by a core molecular feedback loop composed of canonical circadian ("clock") genes and proteins.
Different modulators help to maintain the proper rhythmicity of these genes and proteins, and one emerging modulator is dopamine.
Dopamine has been shown to have circadian-like activities in the retina, olfactory bulb, striatum, midbrain, and hypothalamus, where it regulates, and is regulated by, clock genes in some of these areas.
Thus, it is likely that dopamine is essential to mechanisms that maintain proper rhythmicity of these five brain areas.
This review discusses studies that showcase different dopaminergic mechanisms that may be involved with the regulation of these brain areas' circadian rhythms.
Mechanisms include how dopamine and dopamine receptor activity directly and indirectly influence clock genes and proteins, how dopamine's interactions with gap junctions influence daily neuronal excitability, and how dopamine's release and effects are gated by low- and high-pass filters.
Because the dopamine neurons described in this review also release the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA which influences clock protein expression in the retina, we discuss articles that explore how GABA may contribute to the actions of dopamine neurons on circadian rhythms.
Finally, to understand how the loss of function of dopamine neurons could influence circadian rhythms, we review studies linking the neurodegenerative disease Parkinson's Disease to disruptions of circadian rhythms in these five brain areas.
The purpose of this review is to summarize growing evidence that dopamine is involved in regulating circadian rhythms, either directly or indirectly, in the brain areas discussed here.
An appreciation of the growing evidence of dopamine's influence on circadian rhythms may lead to new treatments including pharmacological agents directed at alleviating the various symptoms of circadian rhythm disruption.

28156168

Organisms are believed to have evolved circadian clocks as adaptations to deal with cyclic environmental changes, and therefore it has been hypothesized that evolution in constant environments would lead to regression of such clocks.
However, previous studies have yielded mixed results, and evolution of circadian clocks under constant conditions has remained an unsettled topic of debate in circadian biology.
In continuation of our previous studies, which reported persistence of circadian rhythms in Drosophila melanogaster populations evolving under constant light, here we intended to examine whether circadian clocks and the associated properties evolve differently under constant light and constant darkness.
In this regard, we assayed activity-rest, adult emergence and oviposition rhythms of D. melanogaster populations which have been maintained for over 19 years (~330 generations) under three different light regimes - constant light (LL), light-dark cycles of 12:12 h (LD) and constant darkness (DD).
We observed that while circadian rhythms in all the three behaviors persist in both LL and DD stocks with no differences in circadian period, they differed in certain aspects of the entrained rhythms when compared to controls reared in rhythmic environment (LD).
Interestingly, we also observed that DD stocks have evolved significantly higher robustness or power of free-running activity-rest and adult emergence rhythms compared to LL stocks.
Thus, our study, in addition to corroborating previous results of circadian clock evolution in constant light, also highlights that, contrary to the expected regression of circadian clocks, rearing in constant darkness leads to the evolution of more robust circadian clocks which may be attributed to an intrinsic adaptive advantage of circadian clocks and/or pleiotropic functions of clock genes in other traits.

28096235

Cardiotrophin (CT)-1 is a regulator of glucose and lipid homeostasis.
In the present study, we analyzed whether CT-1 also acts to peripherally regulate metabolic rhythms and adipose tissue core clock genes in mice.
Moreover, the circadian pattern of plasma CT-1 levels was evaluated in normal-weight and overweight subjects.
The circadian rhythmicity of oxygen consumption rate (Vo2) was disrupted in aged obese CT-1-deficient (CT-1(-/-)) mice (12 mo).
Although circadian rhythms of Vo2 were conserved in young lean CT-1(-/-) mice (2 mo), CT-1 deficiency caused a phase shift of the acrophase.
Most of the clock genes studied (Clock, Bmal1, and Per2) displayed a circadian rhythm in adipose tissue of both wild-type (WT) and CT-1(-/-) mice.
However, the pattern was altered in CT-1(-/-) mice toward a lower percentage of the rhythm or lower amplitude, especially for Bmal1 and Clock.
Moreover, CT-1 mRNA levels in adipose tissue showed significant circadian fluctuations in young WT mice.
In humans, CT-1 plasma profile exhibited a 24-h circadian rhythm in normal-weight but not in overweight subjects.
The 24-h pattern of CT-1 was characterized by a pronounced increase during the night (from 02:00 to 08:00).
These observations suggest a potential role for CT-1 in the regulation of metabolic circadian rhythms.-Lopez-Yoldi, M., Stanhope, K. L., Garaulet, M., Chen, X. G., Marcos-Gomez, B., Carrasco-Benso, M. P., Santa Maria, E. M., Escote, X., Lee, V., Nunez, M. V., Medici, V., Martinez-Anso, E., Sainz, N., Huerta, A. E., Laiglesia, L. M., Prieto, J., Martinez, J.A., Bustos, M., Havel, P. J., Moreno-Aliaga, M. J.
Role of cardiotrophin-1 in the regulation of metabolic circadian rhythms and adipose core clock genes in mice and characterization of 24-h circulating CT-1 profiles in normal-weight and overweight/obese subjects.

27793218

Circadian rhythms are 24-h patterns regulating behavior, organs, and cells in living organisms.
These rhythms align biological functions with regular and predictable environmental patterns to optimize function and health.
Disruption of these rhythms can be detrimental resulting in metabolic syndrome, cancer, or cardiovascular disease, just to name a few.
It is now becoming clear that the intestinal microbiome is also regulated by circadian rhythms via intrinsic circadian clocks as well as via the host organism.
Microbiota rhythms are regulated by diet and time of feeding which can alter both microbial community structure and metabolic activity which can significantly impact host immune and metabolic function.
In this review, we will cover how host circadian rhythms are generated and maintained, how host circadian rhythms can be disrupted, as well as the consequences of circadian rhythm disruption.
We will further highlight the newly emerging literature indicating the importance of circadian rhythms of the intestinal microbiota.

30009381

OBJECTIVES: Circadian rhythms are affected in many neurological disorders.
Although sleep disturbances are known in epilepsy, data on circadian rhythm disturbances in epilepsy are sparse.
Here, we examined diurnal and circadian rest-activity and sleep-wake patterns in Kcna1-null mice, which exhibit spontaneous recurrent seizures and are a model of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy.
Furthermore, we sought to determine whether seizures or aberrant oscillation of core clock genes and a regulator, sirtuin 1 (Sirt1), is associated with disrupted rhythms.
METHODS: We used passive infrared actigraphy to assess rest-activity patterns, electroencephalography for seizure and sleep analysis, and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting to evaluate expression of clock genes and Sirt1 in Kcna1-null and wild-type mice.
RESULTS: Epileptic Kcna1-null animals have disrupted diurnal and circadian rest-activity patterns, tending to exhibit prolonged circadian periods.
Electroencephalographic analysis confirmed disturbances in sleep architecture, with more time spent awake and less asleep.
Although all epileptic mice manifested disrupted diurnal and circadian rest-activity patterns, we found no correlation between actual seizure burden and degree of sleep disruption.
However, we found attenuated oscillations of several clock genes (ie, Clock, Bmal1, Per1, and Per2) and diurnal Sirt1 mRNA in the anterior hypothalamus.
SIGNIFICANCE: Attenuated oscillation of several core clock genes correlates with, and may underlie, aberrant diurnal and circadian rest-activity and sleep-wake patterns observed in Kcna1-null mice.
This could contribute to late complications in epilepsy, such as sudden unexpected death in epilepsy.
Sirt1 may represent a useful therapeutic target for rescuing circadian clock gene rhythmicity and sleep patterns in epilepsy.

29331582

Most living organisms maintain cell autonomous circadian clocks that synchronize critical biological functions with daily environmental cycles.
In mammals, the circadian clock is regulated by inputs from signaling pathways including glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3).
The drug lithium has actions on GSK3, and also on inositol metabolism.
While it is suspected that lithium's inhibition of GSK3 causes rhythm changes, it is not known if inositol polyphosphates can also affect the circadian clock.
We examined whether the signaling molecule inositol hexaphosphate (IP6) has effects on circadian rhythms.
Using a bioluminescent reporter (Per2::luc) to measure circadian rhythms, we determined that IP6 increased rhythm amplitude and shortened period in NIH3T3 cells.
The IP6 effect on amplitude was attenuated by selective siRNA knockdown of GSK3B and pharmacological blockade of AKT kinase.
However, unlike lithium, IP6 did not induce serine-9 phosphorylation of GSK3B.
The synthesis of IP6 involves the enzymes inositol polyphosphate multikinase (IPMK) and inositol pentakisphosphate 2-kinase (IPPK).
Knockdown of Ippk had effects opposite to those of IP6, decreasing rhythm amplitude and lengthening period.
Ipmk knockdown had few effects on rhythm alone, but attenuated the effects of lithium on rhythms.
However, lithium did not change the intracellular content of IP6 in NIH3T3 cells or neurons.
Pharmacological inhibition of the IP6 kinases (IP6K) increased rhythm amplitude and shortened period, suggesting secondary effects of inositol pyrophosphates may underlie the period shortening effect, but not the amplitude increasing effect of IP6.
Overall, we conclude that inositol phosphates, in particular IP6 have effects on circadian rhythms.
Manipulations affecting IP6 and related inositol phosphates may offer a novel means through which circadian rhythms can be regulated.

23376587

Patients with liver cirrhosis may present impaired sleep-wake and circadian rhythms, relative adrenal insufficiency and altered hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal gland (HPA) axis.
The underlying mechanisms remain unclear.
Circadian rhythms are modulated by corticosteroids which secretion is regulated by HPA axis.
Hyperammonemia alters circadian rhythms of activity and corticosterone in rats.
The aims were: (1) assessing whether corticosterone alterations are responsible for altered circadian rhythm in hyperammonemia: (2) to shed light on the mechanism by which corticosterone circadian rhythm is altered in hyperammonemia.
The effects of daily corticosterone injection at ZT10 on circadian rhythms of activity, plasma corticosterone, adreno-corticotropic hormone (ACTH) and hypothalamic corticotropic releasing hormone (CRH) were assessed in control and hyperammonemic rats.
ACTH-induced corticosterone release was analyzed in cultured adrenal cells.
Corticosterone injection restores the corticosterone peak in hyperammonemic rats and their activity and circadian rhythm.
Plasma ACTH and CRH in hypothalamus are increased in hyperammonemic rats.
Corticosterone injection normalizes ACTH.
Chronic hyperammonemia impairs adrenal function, reduces corticosterone content and ACTH-induced corticosterone release in adrenals, leading to reduced feedback modulation of HPA axis by corticosterone which contributes to impair circadian rhythms of activity.
Impaired circadian rhythms and motor activity may be corrected in hyperammonemia and hepatic encephalopathy by corticosterone treatment.

28196106

Drosophila melanogaster is a common model used to study circadian rhythms in behavior and circadian clocks.
However, numerous circadian rhythms have also been detected in non-clock neurons, especially in the first optic neuropil (lamina) of the fly's visual system.
Such rhythms have been observed in the number of synapses and in the structure of interneurons, which exhibit changes in size and shape in a circadian manner.
Although the patterns of these changes are known, the mechanism remains unclear.
In the present study, we investigated the role of the TOR signaling pathway and autophagy in regulating circadian rhythms based on the behavior and structural plasticity of the lamina L2 monopolar cell dendritic trees.
In addition, we examined the cyclic expression of the TOR signaling pathway (Tor, Pi3K class 1, Akt1) and autophagy (Atg5 and Atg7) genes in the fly's brain.
We observed that Tor, Atg5 and Atg7 exhibit rhythmic expressions in the brain of wild-type flies in day/night conditions (LD 12:12) that are abolished in per01 clock mutants.
The silencing of Tor in per expressing cells shortens a period of the locomotor activity rhythm of flies.
In addition, silencing of the Tor and Atg5 genes in L2 cells disrupts the circadian plasticity of the L2 cell dendritic trees measured in the distal lamina.
In turn, silencing of the Atg7 gene in L2 cells changes the pattern of this rhythm.
Our results indicate that the TOR signaling pathway and autophagy are involved in the regulation of circadian rhythms in the behavior and plasticity of neurons in the brain of adult flies.

25246026

Shift work comprises work schedules that extend beyond the typical "nine-to-five" workday, wherein schedules often comprise early work start, compressed work weeks with 12-hour shifts, and night work.
According to recent American and European surveys, between 15 and 30% of adult workers are engaged in some type of shift work, with 19% of the European population reportedly working at least 2 hours between 22:00 and 05:00.
The 2005 International Classification of Sleep Disorders estimates that a shift work sleep disorder can be found in 2-5% of workers.
This disorder is characterized by excessive sleepiness and/or sleep disruption for at least one month in relation with the atypical work schedule.
Individual tolerance to shift work remains a complex problem that is affected by the number of consecutive work hours and shifts, the rest periods, and the predictability of work schedules.
Sleepiness usually occurs during night shifts and is maximal at the end of the night.
Impaired vigilance and performance occur around times of increased sleepiness and can seriously compromise workers' health and safety.
Indeed, workers suffering from a shift work sleep-wake disorder can fall asleep involuntarily at work or while driving back home after a night shift.
Working on atypical shifts has important socioeconomic impacts as it leads to an increased risk of accidents, workers' impairment and danger to public safety, especially at night.
The aim of the present review is to review the circadian and sleep-wake disturbances associated with shift work as well as their medical impacts.

27003509

Bipolar disorder (BD) is a severe and common psychiatric disorder.
BD pathogenesis, clinical manifestations and relapses are associated with numerous circadian rhythm abnormalities.
Lithium (Li) is the first-line treatment in BD, and its therapeutic action has been related to its ability to alter circadian rhythms.
We systematically searched the PubMed database until January 2016, aiming to critically examine published studies investigating direct and indirect effects of Li on circadian rhythms.
The results, from the 95 retained studies, indicated that Li: acts directly on the molecular clocks; delays the phase of sleep-wakefulness rhythms and the peak elevation of diurnal cycle body temperature; reduces the amplitude and shortens the duration of activity rhythms and lengthens free-running rhythms.
Chronic Li treatment stabilizes free-running activity rhythms, by improving day-to-day rhythmicity of the activity, with effects that appear to be dose related.
Pharmacogenetics demonstrate several associations of Li's response with circadian genes (NR1D1, GSK3beta, CRY1, ARNTL, TIM, PER2).
Finally, Li acts on the retinal-hypothalamic pineal pathway, influencing light sensitivity and melatonin secretion.
Li is a highly investigated chronobiologic agent, and although its chronobiological effects are not completely understood, it seems highly likely that they constitute an inherent component of its therapeutic action in the treatment of mood disorders.

30365258

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of electroacupuncture (EA) on the rhythm of running-wheel activity of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) mice and the expression of Per 1 and Per 2 (circadian rhythm genes) in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), so as to investigate its mechanism underlying regulating circadian rhythm.
METHODS: A total of 108 male C 57 BL / 6 J mice were randomly divided into control, HCC model and EA groups which were further assigned to six zeitbeger (environmental light-dark cycle) time (ZT) point (ZT 0, ZT 4, ZT 8, ZT 12, ZT 16 and ZT 20) subgroups.
The HCC model was established by injection of H 22 cancer cell (abdominal 3(rd) generation, 10 microL) suspension into the larger live lobe.
Mice of the control group received saline injection of the liver lobe.
EA (2 Hz/15 Hz, 0.2 mA) was applied to bilateral "Ganshu" (BL 18) and "Zhiyang" (GV 9) for 15 min, once daily for 10 days.
Mice of the control and model groups received the same binding-fixing to those of the EA group.
Circadian running-wheel activity of 12 hratio12 h light darkness (LD) cycle (activity onset and acrophase of actogram, amplitude or peak of periodogram) was recorded by using ClockLab (ACT-500) software and analyzed by MATLAB (R 2007 b) before and after EA treatment.
The pathological changes of liver cells were observed under light microscope after sectioning and HE staining.
The expression levels of Per 1 mRNA and Per 2 mRNA in the liver tissues were determined by fluorogenic quantitative real time-PCR.
RESULTS: (1) Following modeling, the amplitude of periodogram of running-wheel activity was significantly lowered at ZT 0, ZT 4, ZT 8, ZT 12, ZT 16, and ZT 20 relevant to the control group (P<0.05).
After EA intervention, the amplitude of periodogram at ZT 8 (1500) was considerably increased relevant to the model group (P<0.05), and the acrophase at ZT 8 was remarkably advanced (P<0.05).
No significant changes were found in the onset time and periods of periodogram at the 6 time-points after modeling and EA intervention (P>0.05).
(2) The expression levels of Per 1 mRNA and Per 2 mRNA in the SCN were significantly up-regulated at the 6 time-points in the model group relevant to the control group (P<0.05), and obviously down-regulated at ZT 8 after EA intervention relevant to the model group (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: EA can benignly regulate the rhythm of running-wheel activity of HCC mice, which may be closely related to its effect in down-regulating the expression of circadian rhythm genes Per 1 and Per 2 in the SCN.

28977444

Circadian rhythms are 24-h rhythms in physiology and behaviour generated by molecular clocks, which serve to coordinate internal time with the external world.
The circadian system is a master regulator of nearly all physiology and its disruption has major consequences on health.
Sleep and circadian rhythm disruption (SCRD) is a ubiquitous feature in today's 24/7 society, and studies on shift-workers have shown that SCRD can lead not only to cognitive impairment, but also metabolic syndrome and psychiatric illness including depression (1,2).
Mouse models of clock mutants recapitulate these deficits, implicating mechanistic and causal links between SCRD and disease pathophysiology (3-5).
Importantly, treating clock disruption reverses and attenuates these adverse health states in animal models (6,7), thus establishing the circadian system as a novel therapeutic target.
Significantly, circadian and clock-controlled gene mutations have recently been identified by Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) in the aetiology of sleep, mental health and metabolic disorders.
This review will focus upon the genetics of circadian rhythms in sleep and health.

26203935

Patients with liver cirrhosis show disturbances in sleep and in its circadian rhythms which are an early sign of minimal hepatic encephalopathy (MHE).
The mechanisms of these disturbances are poorly understood.
Rats with porta-caval shunt (PCS), a model of MHE, show sleep disturbances reproducing those of cirrhotic patients.
The aims of this work were to characterize the alterations in circadian rhythms in PCS rats and analyze the underlying mechanisms.
To reach these aims, we analyzed in control and PCS rats: (a) daily rhythms of spontaneous and rewarding activity and of temperature, (b) timing of the onset of activity following turning-off the light, (c) synchronization to light after a phase advance and (d) the molecular mechanisms contributing to these alterations in circadian rhythms.
PCS rats show altered circadian rhythms of spontaneous and rewarding activities (wheel running).
PCS rats show more rest bouts during the active phase, more errors in the onset of motor activity and need less time to re-synchronize after a phase advance than control rats.
Circadian rhythm of body temperature is also slightly altered in PCS rats.
The internal period length (tau) of circadian rhythm of motor activity is longer in PCS rats.
We analyzed some mechanisms by which hypothalamus modulate circadian rhythms.
PCS rats show increased content of cGMP in hypothalamus while the activity of cGMP-dependent protein kinase was reduced by 41% compared to control rats.
Altered cGMP-PKG pathway in hypothalamus would contribute to altered circadian rhythms and synchronization to light.

24886186

Circadian rhythms influence virtually every aspect of behavior.
This special issue provides updates on the current state and future directions for the field of circadian rhythms in behavioral neuroscience.
Recent data have linked circadian rhythms to behavioral and physiological phenomena and disease states in virtually every area of behavioral and biomedical science.
Specifically, a growing interest in the cognitive, neuropsychiatric, and metabolic consequences of circadian rhythm disorders and dysfunction is emerging.
This special issue is not intended to provide an exhaustive overview of the entire field of chronobiology or behavioral rhythms.
Instead, we invited researchers from a variety of fields to critically review and integrate studies that address the roles of circadian rhythms in behavioral neuroscience.
The papers included in this issue range from the molecular biology of clock genes to the behavior of free-living animals, and cover a wide variety of species ranging from insects, to rodents, to humans.
As such, the reviews provide an overview of the burgeoning field of circadian rhythms within behavioral neuroscience.

29724861

Post-translational control is a crucial mechanism for circadian timekeeping.
Evolutionarily conserved kinases and phosphatases have been implicated in circadian phosphorylation and the degradation of clock-relevant proteins, which sustain high-amplitude rhythms with 24-hr periodicity in animal behaviors and physiology.
Here, we report a novel clock function of the heterodimeric Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent phosphatase calcineurin and its regulator sarah (sra) in Drosophila Genomic deletion of the sra locus dampened circadian locomotor activity rhythms in free-running constant dark after entrainment in light-dark cycles.
Poor rhythms in sra mutant behaviors were accompanied by lower expression of two oscillating clock proteins, PERIOD (PER) and TIMELESS (TIM), at the post-transcriptional level.
RNA interference-mediated sra depletion in circadian pacemaker neurons was sufficient to phenocopy loss-of-function mutation in sra On the other hand, a constitutively active form of the catalytic calcineurin subunit, Pp2B-14D(ACT), shortened circadian periodicity in locomotor behaviors and phase-advanced PER and TIM rhythms when overexpressed in clock neurons.
Heterozygous sra deletion induced behavioral arrhythmicity in Pp2B-14D(ACT) flies, whereas sra overexpression rescued short periods in these animals.
Finally, pharmacological inhibition of calcineurin in either wild-type flies or clock-less S2 cells decreased the levels of PER and TIM, likely by facilitating their proteasomal degradation.
Taken together, these data suggest that sra negatively regulates calcineurin by cell-autonomously titrating calcineurin-dependent stabilization of PER and TIM proteins, thereby sustaining high-amplitude behavioral rhythms in Drosophila.

27113500

BACKGROUND: Major depressive disorder is associated with disturbed circadian rhythms.
To investigate the causal relationship between mood disorders and circadian clock disruption, previous studies in animal models have employed light/dark manipulations, global mutations of clock genes, or brain area lesions.
However, light can impact mood by noncircadian mechanisms; clock genes have pleiotropic, clock-independent functions; and brain lesions not only disrupt cellular circadian rhythms but also destroy cells and eliminate important neuronal connections, including light reception pathways.
Thus, a definitive causal role for functioning circadian clocks in mood regulation has not been established.
METHODS: We stereotactically injected viral vectors encoding short hairpin RNA to knock down expression of the essential clock gene Bmal1 into the brain's master circadian pacemaker, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN).
RESULTS: In these SCN-specific Bmal1-knockdown (SCN-Bmal1-KD) mice, circadian rhythms were greatly attenuated in the SCN, while the mice were maintained in a standard light/dark cycle, SCN neurons remained intact, and neuronal connections were undisturbed, including photic inputs.
In the learned helplessness paradigm, the SCN-Bmal1-KD mice were slower to escape, even before exposure to inescapable stress.
They also spent more time immobile in the tail suspension test and less time in the lighted section of a light/dark box.
The SCN-Bmal1-KD mice also showed greater weight gain, an abnormal circadian pattern of corticosterone, and an attenuated increase of corticosterone in response to stress.
CONCLUSIONS: Disrupting SCN circadian rhythms is sufficient to cause helplessness, behavioral despair, and anxiety-like behavior in mice, establishing SCN-Bmal1-KD mice as a new animal model of depression.

29691928

PURPOSE: Despite extensive research, mechanisms regulating postnatal eye growth and those responsible for ametropias are poorly understood.
With the marked recent increases in myopia prevalence, robust and biologically-based clinical therapies to normalize refractive development in childhood are needed.
Here, we review classic and contemporary literature about how circadian biology might provide clues to develop a framework to improve the understanding of myopia etiology, and possibly lead to rational approaches to ameliorate refractive errors developing in children.
RECENT FINDINGS: Increasing evidence implicates diurnal and circadian rhythms in eye growth and refractive error development.
In both humans and animals, ocular length and other anatomical and physiological features of the eye undergo diurnal oscillations.
Systemically, such rhythms are primarily generated by the 'master clock' in the surpachiasmatic nucleus, which receives input from the intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) through the activation of the photopigment melanopsin.
The retina also has an endogenous circadian clock.
In laboratory animals developing experimental myopia, oscillations of ocular parameters are perturbed.
Retinal signaling is now believed to influence refractive development; dopamine, an important neurotransmitter found in the retina, not only entrains intrinsic retinal rhythms to the light:dark cycle, but it also modulates refractive development.
Circadian clocks comprise a transcription/translation feedback control mechanism utilizing so-called clock genes that have now been associated with experimental ametropias.
Contemporary clinical research is also reviving ideas first proposed in the nineteenth century that light exposures might impact refraction in children.
As a result, properties of ambient lighting are being investigated in refractive development.
In other areas of medical science, circadian dysregulation is now thought to impact many non-ocular disorders, likely because the patterns of modern artificial lighting exert adverse physiological effects on circadian pacemakers.
How, or if, such modern light exposures and circadian dysregulation contribute to refractive development is not known.
SUMMARY: The premise of this review is that circadian biology could be a productive area worthy of increased investigation, which might lead to the improved understanding of refractive development and improved therapeutic interventions.

30689226

Aging leads to changes in circadian rhythms, including decreased amplitude or robustness, altered synchrony with the environment, and reduced coordination of rhythms within body.
These circadian rhythm alterations are more pronounced in age-associated neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), in which they often precede the onset of other symptoms by many years.
As well as their early onset, the findings that fragmentation of daily rest-activity rhythms in non-demented older subjects is associated earlier cognitive decline, increased risk of incident AD, and preclinical AD neuropathology, suggest that circadian rhythm disruption may contribute to the development and progression of the neuropathological changes occurring in AD.
Conversely, other studies have implicated amyloid-beta, a prominent neurotoxin that accumulates in AD, in the impairment of circadian rhythms.
Thus, circadian rhythm disruption and AD-associated neurodegeneration may interact to form a deleterious cycle.
This article reviews the neural and molecular mechanisms underlying the age- and AD-related changes in circadian rhythms.
It also explores therapeutic strategies proposed to ameliorate circadian rhythm deficits in elderly and demented individuals.

======================================================================
Frustrative_Nonreward
======================================================================
25360124

In a longitudinal study with N = 1,854 adolescents from Germany, we investigated patterns of change and gender differences in physical and relational aggression in relation to normative beliefs about these two forms of aggression.
Participants, whose mean age was 13 years at T1, completed self-report measures of physically and relationally aggressive behavior and indicated their normative approval of both forms of aggression at four data waves separated by 12-month intervals.
Boys scored higher than did girls on both forms of aggression, but the gender difference was more pronounced for physical aggression.
Physical aggression decreased and relational aggression increased over the four data waves in both gender groups.
The normative acceptance of both forms of aggression decreased over time, with a greater decrease for the approval of physical aggression.
In both gender groups, normative approval of relational aggression prospectively predicted relational aggression across all data waves, and the normative approval of physical aggression predicted physically aggressive behavior at the second and third data waves.
A reciprocal reinforcement of aggressive norms and behavior was found for both forms of aggression.
The findings are discussed as supporting a social information processing perspective on developmental patterns of change in physical and relational aggression in adolescence.

29057169

Researchers have debated whether relational aggression is a developmentally-normative behavior or a sign of some underlying psychopathology.
However, due to the dearth of longitudinal studies, we know little about how relational aggression and more severe forms of disruptive behavior co-develop.
The present study examined bidirectional associations between relational aggression and two psychiatric disorders, Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD) and Conduct Disorder (CD), using data from a longitudinal study of 674 Mexican-origin youth followed from age 10 to 16.
Results showed that individuals who engaged in relational aggression tended to increase over time in ODD and CD symptoms, and conversely, individuals exhibiting symptoms of ODD and CD tended to increase in relational aggression.
These findings held for boys and girls, for youth born in Mexico and the U.S., and after controlling for physical aggression.
Thus, relational aggression seems to be both a developmentally-normative behavior and a predictor of future mental health problems.

26990794

Adolescent peer aggression is a well-established correlate of romantic relational aggression; however, the mechanisms underlying this association are unclear.
Heavy episodic drinking (or "binge" alcohol use) was examined as both a prior and concurrent mediator of this link in a sample of 282 12-18 year old interviewed four times over 6 years.
Path analyses indicated that early peer relational and physical aggression each uniquely predicted later romantic relational aggression.
Concurrent heavy episodic drinking fully mediated this effect for peer physical aggression only.
These findings highlight two important mechanisms by which peer aggression may increase the risk of later romantic relational aggression: a direct pathway from peer relational aggression to romantic relational aggression and an indirect pathway through peer physical aggression and concurrent heavy episodic drinking.
Prevention programs targeting romantic relational aggression in adolescence and young adulthood may benefit from interventions that target multiple domains of risky behavior, including the heavy concurrent use of alcohol Aggr Behav 42:563-576, 2016 (c) 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

24318459

A three-wave longitudinal study among ethnically diverse preadolescents (N = 597 at Time 1, ages 9-11) was conducted to examine adaptive, maladaptive, mediational, and bidirectional processes of relational and physical aggression, victimization, and peer liking indexed by peer acceptance and friendships.
A series of nested structural equation models tested the hypothesized links among these peer-domain factors.
It was hypothesized that (1) relational aggression trails both adaptive and maladaptive processes, linking to more peer victimization and more peer liking, whereas physical aggression is maladaptive, resulting in more peer victimization and less peer liking; (2) physical and relational victimization is maladaptive, relating to more aggression and less peer liking; (3) peer liking may be the social context that promotes relational aggression (not physical aggression), whereas peer liking may protect against peer victimization, regardless of its type; and (4) peer liking mediates the link between forms of aggression and forms of peer victimization.
Results showed that higher levels of peer liking predicted relative increases in relational aggression (not physical aggression), which in turn led to more peer liking.
On the other hand, more peer liking was predictive of relative decreases in relational aggression and relational victimization in transition to the next grade (i.e., fifth grade).
In addition, relational victimization predicted relative increases in relational aggression and relative decreases in peer liking.
Similarly, physical aggression was consistently and concurrently associated more physical victimization and was marginally predictive of relative increases in physical victimization in transition to the next grade.
More peer liking predicted relative decreases in physical victimization, which resulted in lower levels of peer liking.
The directionality and magnitude of these paths did not differ between boys and girls.

30526706

BACKGROUND: Prior work has indicated both theoretical and empirical overlap between social and physical aggression.
The extent to which their covariance can be explained by the same underlying genetic or environmental factors, however, remains unclear.
It is also uncertain whether or how the origins of their covariance might vary across sex.
The current study sought to fill these gaps in the literature.
METHODS: We examined maternal and teacher reports of youth physical and social aggression in over 1000 6-10 years old (mean age = 8.02 years) twin pairs from the Michigan State University Twin Registry.
We made use of the bivariate correlated factors model to clarify the origins of their association.
We further tested both sex difference and no-sex difference versions of that model to determine whether there are sex differences in the association between social and physical aggression, as often assumed.
RESULTS: The covariation between social and physical aggression was due to overlapping genetic factors and common environmental conditions.
Specifically, 50-57% of the genetic factors, 74-100% of the shared environmental factors, and 28-40% of the unique environmental factors influencing physical aggression also influenced social aggression according to both mother and teacher reports.
These shared etiological factors did not differ across sex.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings argue against the common assumption that social aggression is the 'female version' of male physical aggression, and instead suggest that social aggression may be best conceptualized as a form of antisocial behavior that shares developmental pathways with other manifestations of externalizing pathology.

30094657

In the past two decades, there has been a significant amount of research on children's relational aggression, which has been found to be associated with psychosocial problems.
Longitudinal studies have examined changes in relational aggression during early adolescence in relation to individual characteristics; however, most studies compare individual differences between people with regard to rates of relational aggression.
A shortcoming to the current literature is the lack of studies that use a multilevel approach to examine individual differences (between-person) as well as the extent to which individuals deviate from their own typical levels (within-person) over time.
In this study, within- and between-person psychological and peer-related predictors of rates of relational aggression over time were examined.
Participants included 1,655 students in 5th-8th grade (mean age: 13.01) from four public middle schools in the Midwest, which consisted 828 females and 827 males.
In terms of race and ethnicity, 819 (49.5%) were African Americans, followed by 571 (34.5%) Whites, and 265 (16%) Others.
Longitudinal data were collected over four waves across two years of middle school.
The findings indicated that contrary to the hypothesis that relational aggression would increase over time, there was no significant growth across time.
Age, gender, and race were not associated with relational aggression over time; however, consistent with the Social Cognitive Theory, changes in within-person impulsivity, anger, and peer delinquency were all positively related to increases in relational aggression.
At the between-person level of analysis, depressive symptoms and peer delinquency were related to relational aggression.
Findings suggest that school-based programs that address anger management, impulsivity, empathy, and victimization could help prevent relational aggression.

25047304

Dispositional trait frameworks offer great potential to elucidate the nature and development of psychopathology, including the construct of relational aggression.
The present study sought to explore the dispositional context of relational aggression across three dispositional frameworks: temperament, personality, and personality pathology.
Participants comprised a large community sample of youth, aged 6 to 18 years (N = 1,188; 51.2% female).
Ratings of children's relational aggression, temperament, personality, and personality pathology traits were obtained through parent report (86.3% mothers).
Results showed convergence and divergence across these three dispositional frameworks.
Like other antisocial behavior subtypes, relational aggression generally showed connections with traits reflecting negative emotionality and poor self-regulation.
Relational aggression showed stronger connections with temperament traits than with personality traits, suggesting that temperament frameworks may capture more relationally aggressive content.
Findings at the lower order trait level help differentiate relational aggression from other externalizing problems by providing a more nuanced perspective (e.g., both sociability and shyness positively predicted relational aggression).
In addition, there was little evidence of moderation of these associations by gender, age, or age2, and findings remained robust even after controlling for physical aggression.
Results are discussed in the broader context of conceptualizing relational aggression in an overarching personality-psychopathology framework.

29514551

Unlike the overt nature of physical aggression, which lends itself to simpler and more direct methods of investigation, the often-masked nature of relational aggression has led to difficulties and debate regarding the most effective tools of study.
Given concerns with the accuracy of third-party relational aggression reports, especially as individuals age, self-report measures may be particularly useful when assessing experiences with relational aggression.
However, it is important to recognize validity concerns-in particular, the potential effects of item order presentation-associated with self-report of relational aggression perpetration and victimization.
To investigate this issue, surveys were administered and completed by 179 young adults randomly assigned to one of four survey conditions reflecting manipulation of item order.
Survey conditions included presentation of (a) perpetration items only, (b) victimization items only, (c) perpetration items followed by victimization items, and (d) victimization items followed by perpetration items.
Results revealed that participants reported perpetrating relational aggression significantly more often when asked only about perpetration or when asked about perpetration before victimization, compared with participants who were asked about victimization before perpetration.
Item order manipulation did not result in significant differences in self-reported victimization experiences.
Results of this study indicate a need for greater consideration of item order when conducting research using self-report data and the importance of additional investigation into which form of item presentation elicits the most accurate self-report information.

28735605

The present article examined the development of relational aggression in middle childhood and the effects of observed teacher behavior on this development.
Relying on social learning theory, we expected that teacher praise would slow down the increase of relational aggression, whereas teacher reprimands would promote the increase of relational aggression.
A sample of 570 children (49% boys, Mage=7years and 5months, >95% Belgian) was followed from second to fourth grade.
Teacher praise and reprimands were observed at the beginning of second grade.
Child relational aggression was assessed using teacher and peer reports, collected at five points in time: at the beginning and end of the second grade, at the beginning and end of the third grade, and at the end of the fourth grade.
Multilevel modeling showed that relational aggression generally increased from second to fourth grade.
Moreover, when teachers displayed more praise, students' relational aggression increased at a slower rate; when teachers displayed more reprimands, students' relational aggression increased at a faster rate.
Overall, the results stress the importance of supporting teachers to reduce reprimands and increase praise when interacting with children.

29294674

Existing literature exemplifies the relationship between alcohol and overt aggression, especially for adult males.
Less clear is the relationship between alcohol and aggression among male and female college students, in particular, the nature of this aggression and the co-occurrence of drinking and aggression on the same day (temporal proximity).
This study examines the chronic and temporal nature of males' and females' alcohol-related aggression among college students.
Two hundred fourteen students completed a web-based 7-day event-level survey measuring alcohol consumption and perpetration of physical aggression, verbal aggression, anger, and relational aggression over 4 weeks, resulting in 4,256 observations (days).
The global analysis revealed students who are heavy drinkers are more likely to perpetrate all four forms of aggression, whereas the event-level analysis revealed that specific forms of aggression are associated with drinking at the time, while other forms were not linked to drinking occasions.
Cross-tabulation revealed males and females were more likely to use verbal and physical aggression when drinking.
For females, drinking was also associated with relational aggression and anger.
Despite often being overlooked in research on aggression during emerging adulthood, relational aggression was prevalent.
Discrepancies between the global and temporal analysis revealed factors other than alcohol might explain the relationship between chronic alcohol consumption and specific forms of aggression.
This is one of the first event-level studies to show the temporal relationship between alcohol and relational aggression.
The distinctions in the current study, exemplifying the diversity of alcohol-related aggression, are critical for understanding aggressive behavior, potential gender differences, and for developing interventions.
The temporal relationship between alcohol and aggression suggests health interventions should target drinking and aggression simultaneously.

23111842

Research conducted over the last decade has documented both the high rates of and serious consequences associated with both victimization and perpetration of relational aggression.
This study examines risk for involvement in relational aggression and victimization among middle school youth, evaluating both individual beliefs about violence, as well as aspects of the school environment, including interpersonal school climate and school responsiveness to violence.
A sample of 5,625 primarily urban minority middle school youth (49.2 % female) participating in a violence prevention project completed measures of relational aggression and victimization as well as indicators of individual beliefs about aggression, school norms for aggression, student-teacher and student-student interpersonal climate, and school responsiveness to violence.
Unlike results previously found for physical aggression, no school-level indicator of climate was related to relational aggression or victimization.
However, individual beliefs about aggression and individual perceptions of the school environment were related strongly to both the perpetration of and victimization by relational aggression.
These results suggest not only that individual beliefs and perceptions of the school environment are important in understanding perpetration and victimization of relational aggression, but also that risk for involvement in relational aggression is distinct from that of physical aggression.
Implications for school interventions are discussed, as well as suggestions for future research.

22331610

This study examined adolescent narcissism, temperament (frustration and affiliation), and social goals in association with peer-reported physical and relational aggression (N = 384; 12-14 years).
Narcissism was positively associated with dominance goals and negatively with closeness goals for peer interaction.
Moreover, narcissism was positively associated with physical aggression via dominance goals for boys, and with relational aggression via dominance goals for both genders.
Temperamental frustration and affiliation were both positively associated with relational aggression, but also interacted in their associations with this variable; affiliation was positively associated with relational aggression only at high levels of frustration.
Supporting and extending existing research, the present findings suggest that adolescent personality and social goals are meaningfully associated with physical and relational aggression in the peer context.

26174166

This research examined the moderating effect of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) on the associations between relational victimization and reactive and proactive relational aggression.
Both branches of the ANS, the parasympathetic nervous system (indexed by respiratory sinus arrhythmia reactivity; RSA-Reactivity) and the sympathetic nervous system (indexed by skin conductance level reactivity; SCL-Reactivity), were examined.
Emerging adults (N = 168) self-reported on relational victimization and proactive and reactive relational aggression; RSA-Reactivity and SCL-Reactivity were assessed in response to a laboratory stressor.
Relational victimization predicted heightened reactive relational aggression given RSA augmentation/high SCL-Reactivity (i.e., coactivation) and RSA withdrawal/low SCL-Reactivity (i.e., coinhibition).
In addition, relational victimization predicted heightened reactive relational aggression given RSA augmentation/low SCL-Reactivity (i.e., reciprocal parasympathetic activation).
This study extends previous research on relational victimization and provides novel evidence that (a) exposure to relational victimization is associated with reactive relational aggression, but not proactive relational aggression, and (b) parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous system reactivity jointly moderate the link between relational victimization and reactive relational aggression.

18706767

The present study investigated the longitudinal relationships between physical and relational aggression and later drug use, as moderated by gender.
Self-reported data were gathered from 2064 high school students at pretest and 1-year post-test to test the hypotheses that (1) males would engage in more physical aggression than females, whereas females would engage in more relational aggression than males; and (2) physical aggression would be a stronger drug use predictor for males and relational aggression a stronger predictor for females.
Results indicated that males reported engaging in more physical aggression than females at baseline; however, females and males reported engaging in similar rates of relational aggression.
After controlling for relational aggression, baseline drug use, and demographic variables, physical aggression at baseline was found to predict alcohol use 1-year later for males but not for females.
After controlling for physical aggression, baseline drug use, and demographic variables, relational aggression was found to predict cigarette use and marijuana use for females but not for males.
However, relational aggression was found to predict later alcohol and hard drug equally across gender.
These findings suggest that both physical and relational aggression are predictive of subsequent drug use and have important implications for violence and drug use prevention intervention efforts.

25047298

Crick, Murray-Close, and Woods (2005) encouraged the study of relational aggression as a developmental precursor to borderline personality features in children and adolescents.
A longitudinal study is needed to more fully explore this association, to contrast potential associations with physical aggression, and to assess generalizability across various cultural contexts.
In addition, parenting is of particular interest in the prediction of aggression or borderline personality disorder.
Early aggression and parenting experiences may differ in their long-term prediction of aggression or borderline features, which may have important implications for early intervention.
The currrent study incorporated a longitudinal sample of preschool children (84 boys, 84 girls) living in intact, two-parent biological households in Voronezh, Russia.
Teachers provided ratings of children's relational and physical aggression in preschool.
Mothers and fathers also self-reported their engagement in authoritative, authoritarian, permissive, and psychological controlling forms of parenting with their preschooler.
A decade later, 70.8% of the original child participants consented to a follow-up study in which they completed self-reports of relational and physical aggression and borderline personality features.
The multivariate results of this study showed that preschool relational aggression in girls predicted adolescent relational aggression.
Preschool aversive parenting (i.e., authoritarian, permissive, and psychologically controlling forms) significantly predicted aggression and borderline features in adolescent females.
For adolescent males, preschool authoritative parenting served as a protective factor against aggression and borderline features, whereas authoritarian parenting was a risk factor for later aggression.

29055714

This study investigated the joint effects of parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous system reactivity to social and non-social stressors on proactive (i.e., goal-directed, unemotional) and reactive (i.e., emotional, impulsive) functions of relational aggression.
Two hundred and forty-seven (Mage=18.77years) participants completed a series of stressor tasks while their sympathetic arousal (i.e., skin conductance) and parasympathetic arousal (i.e., respiratory sinus arrhythmia) were assessed.
Participants also provided self-reports of their aggressive behavior.
In the standardized social stressor only, physiological reactivity was related to aggression, such that respiratory sinus arrhythmia augmentation predicted proactive relational aggression whereas heightened skin conductance reactivity predicted reactive relational aggression.
Finally, in the context of low skin conductance reactivity, respiratory sinus arrhythmia augmentation was related to heightened proactive and reactive aggression, whereas respiratory sinus arrhythmia withdrawal was protective.
Results suggest that the benefits hypothesized to accompany respiratory sinus arrhythmia withdrawal may only occur among individuals with low "fight or flight" stress responses.
Findings extend research on the physiological indicators of aggression to relational aggression, and highlight the importance of assessing functions of aggression, as well as physiological reactivity to multiple stressors.

26419234

When studying adolescent development, it is important to consider two key areas that are salient for teens, which are self-concept and peer relations.
A secondary analysis of the National Institute of Health and Human Development Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development was conducted to examine the prospective bidirectional associations between self-concept and peer relations.
To date, how social development broadly and peer relations in particular (e.g., relational aggression and victimization) affect self-concept domains is not fully understood.
Using a large sample (N = 1063; 532 girls; M = 11.14 years; SD = .59) with multiple informants, the present study examined whether fifth grade relational aggression and sixth grade relational victimization was associated with adolescent self-concept in three key domains (i.e., academic, sports, physical appearance).
A significant direct effect emerged, such that relational aggression in middle childhood was associated with decreases in academic self-concept and increases in sports self-concept in adolescence.
Analyses also revealed that having higher levels of domain specific self-concept led to decreases in relational aggression across the transition to adolescence.
The findings highlight the importance of examining bidirectional prospective associations between relational aggression, relational victimization, and domain specific self-concept.
Implications for future research and clinical intervention are discussed.

21684310

The current study investigates whether established associations between physical aggression and low autonomic nervous system arousal, as indexed by heart rate and blood pressure, also apply to the study of the development of relational aggression.
Baseline heart rate and blood pressure were collected in two samples of preschoolers, and teachers reported on classroom physical and relational aggression.
In Study 1, lower systolic and diastolic blood pressure were related to increased engagement in relational aggression among older preschoolers.
In Study 2, lower heart rate and blood pressure predicted increased engagement in classroom physical and relational aggression concurrently and across a preschool year in some cases.
Low baseline arousal-aggression associations were strongest for children with poorer self-regulation abilities, whereas high self-regulation appeared to protect children with low heart rate and blood pressure from engagement in aggressive classroom behavior.
These findings suggest the utility of examining baseline physiological measures in the study of relational aggression as well as physical aggression.
Implications for interventions targeted to physical and relational aggression in early childhood are discussed.

23935227

Distinguishing between relational and physical aggression has become a key feature of many developmental studies in North America and Western Europe, but very little information is available on relational and physical aggression in more diverse cultural contexts.
This study examined the factor structure of, associations between, and gender differences in relational and physical aggression in China, Colombia, Italy, Jordan, Kenya, the Philippines, Sweden, Thailand, and the United States.
Children ages 7-10 years (N = 1,410) reported on their relationally and physically aggressive behavior.
Relational and physical aggression shared a common factor structure across countries.
In all nine countries, relational and physical aggression were significantly correlated (average r = .49).
Countries differed in the mean levels of both relational and physical aggression that children reported using and with respect to whether children reported using more physical than relational aggression or more relational than physical aggression.
Boys reported being more physically aggressive than girls across all nine countries; no consistent gender differences emerged in relational aggression.
Despite mean-level differences in relational and physical aggression across countries, the findings provided support for cross-country similarities in associations between relational and physical aggression as well as links between gender and aggression.

30367685

This study examined discrepancies between 4- and 7-year-olds' (n = 135; Mage = 5.65) self-reported affect following hypothetical moral versus social-conventional transgressions and their associations with teacher-rated physical and relational aggression concurrently and 9-months later.
Negative emotion ratings in response to prototypical moral transgressions were not associated with children's aggression.
When transgressions were described as no longer prohibited by rules and authority figures, children reporting more negative affect in response to moral as compared to conventional violations were less physically aggressive at Wave 1 and showed relative and mean-level declines in physical aggression over time.
Relational aggression was not associated with self-reported emotions.
Findings indicate the importance of distinguishing between types of transgressions and forms of aggression in studying moral emotions.

28054802

Relational aggression occurs in many different contexts, including in romantic relationships.
The current study examined associations between two subtypes of relational aggression (love withdrawal and social sabotage) and marital quality over a 5-year time period.
Participants consisted of 311 married couples who completed a number of questionnaires on relational aggression and relationship quality once a year over a 5-year period.
Results revealed that relational aggression was highly stable over time and that women used more relational aggression than men.
Men's use of social sabotage and love withdrawal were bidirectionally related to both partners' perceptions of poor marital quality over time.
Conversely, only women's use of love withdrawal was related to her own perceptions of poor marital quality over time.
Collectively, these results suggest that relational aggression by men may be less common, though particularly toxic in a marital relationship.
Couples are encouraged to find healthier ways of coping with problems in relationships (PsycINFO Database Record)

======================================================================
Loss
======================================================================
27197727

Tinnitus-related distress appears to be more strongly associated with multiple psychological factors than with any perceptual properties of tinnitus.
Prior studies have not investigated the role of worry in tinnitus sufferers.
Worry is a dispositional cognitive trait that involves a pervasive, non-specific, future-oriented proneness to fretting, which can foster negative affective states and catastrophic thinking about a specific trouble when the trouble is actual and present.
We examined the relationship between worry and self-perceived anxiety and depressive symptoms and handicap in 54 outpatients with chronic tinnitus and sensorineural hearing loss who had been previously recruited for a randomized double-blind study on the efficacy of transmeatal low-level laser therapy for tinnitus.
We measured the current anxiety and depressive symptoms with the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory Form Y-1/Self-evaluation Depression Scale, the handicap with the Tinnitus Handicap Inventory, and the proneness to worry with the Penn State Worry Questionnaire.
For the psychoacoustic tinnitus measures, we considered the loudness match and the minimum masking level.
We found that tinnitus-related anxiety and depressive symptoms and handicap were significantly associated with proneness to worry (linear regression models, p < 0.01), whereas no associations were found with the psychoacoustic measures.
This suggests the usefulness of worry assessment when managing chronic tinnitus in clinical practice.
Early therapeutic interventions for reducing proneness to worry may facilitate better adaptation to tinnitus.

12238739

In this study, we examined the effect of trauma exposure on substance use behaviors, specifically tobacco and alcohol use, in a group of 84 individuals who sought supportive services after the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing.
A self-report instrument was used to assess demographics, sensory exposure, injury, interpersonal exposure through relationship with victims, peritraumatic reaction, grief, posttraumatic stress, worry about safety, functional impairment, and changes in smoking and drinking.
Those who reported increased smoking had higher scores on peritraumatic reaction, grief, posttraumatic stress, worry about safety, and trouble functioning.
Those who reported increased alcohol intake had higher scores on injury, peritraumatic reaction, grief, posttraumatic stress, worry about safety, and trouble functioning.
Sensory exposure and interpersonal exposure were not significantly different between those with and without increased smoking or drinking.
Although no causal relationship can be assumed, our findings indicate an association of grief and posttraumatic stress with increased substance use behaviors in disaster victims.

20455126

Research has shown that intolerance of uncertainty (IU) - the tendency to react negatively to situations that are uncertain - is involved in worry and generalized anxiety disorder, as well as in other anxiety symptoms and disorders.
To our knowledge, no studies have yet examined the association between IU and emotional distress connected with the death of a loved one.
Yet, it seems plausible that those who have more difficulties to tolerate the uncertainties that often times occur following such a loss experience more intense distress.
The current study examined this assumption, using self-reported data from 134 bereaved individuals.
Findings showed that IU was positively and significantly correlated with symptom levels of complicated grief and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), even when controlling for time since loss (the single demographic/loss-related variable associated with symptom levels), and for neuroticism and worry, which are both correlates of IU.
Furthermore, IU was specifically related with worry and symptom levels of PTSD, but not complicated grief, when controlling the shared variance between worry, complicated grief severity, and PTSD-severity.
The present findings complement prior research that has shown that IU is a cognitive vulnerability factor for worry, and indicate that it may also be involved in emotional distress following loss.

30694221

BACKGROUND: Fetal death causes women to experience negative feelings after the loss.
These lived experiences influence the future pregnancies and maternal health of women negatively.
PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to investigate the experiences of women whose pregnancies were terminated because of medical indications.
METHODS: A "design for definitive status study" type of qualitative research design was used.
Ten women who were hospitalized between April and July 2017 at the Akdeniz University Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynecology and had subsequently experienced pregnancy loss during their hospitalization were enrolled as participants.
Thematic analysis was used to analyze the data.
RESULTS: The pregnancy loss experiences of participants were investigated under the five main themes of (a) lived experiences before the termination of pregnancy, (b) lived experiences after pregnancy termination, (c) willingness to see the baby after termination, (d) posttermination care requirements, and (e) physical condition of hospital rooms during hospitalization.
The participants expressed feelings of hope, fear, and worry over being unsuccessful before fetal death and feelings of loneliness, disappointment, blame, and avoidance after fetal death.
CONCLUSIONS/IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: In the aftermath of fetal death, health professionals should use insightful and empathic communication skills to help mothers cope with their loss.
In addition, some of the participants wanted to see their babies, and some did not.
Thus, individualized care is very important for women who experience pregnancy loss.

24843744

AIMS/INTRODUCTION: To evaluate the effects of a caloric restricted weight loss program with or without supervised resistance exercise training (EX) on diabetes-related emotional distress and quality of life (QOL) in overweight and obese patients with type 2 diabetes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In a parallel design, 106 men and women with type 2 diabetes were randomized to a prescriptive 16-week caloric restricted diet (D; 6,000-7,000 kJ/day), with (n = 65) or without (n = 41) EX (three times per week).
Bodyweight, glycated hemoglobin, diabetes-specific emotional distress (Problem Areas in Diabetes [PAID] questionnaire) and QOL (Diabetes-39 [D-39] questionnaire) was assessed pre- and post-intervention.
RESULTS: A total of 84 participants completed the study (D n = 33, D + EX n = 51).
Weight loss was significantly greater in D + EX compared with D (-11.4 +/- 5.8 vs -8.8 +/- 5.8 kg, P = 0.04 time x diet).
Overall, there were significant improvements in glycated hemoglobin, PAID total score and the D-39 dimensions of 'diabetes control', 'anxiety and worry', 'sexual functioning', 'energy and mobility', 'overall rating of QOL' and 'severity of diabetes' (P </= 0.01 for time).
The D-39 dimension, 'social burden', did not change (P = 0.07 for time).
There was no difference between groups in the response for any of these variables (P >/= 0.10).
CONCLUSION: A structured caloric restricted diet with or without EX improves emotional distress and QOL in overweight and obese patients with type 2 diabetes.
This trial was registered with Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (http://www.anzctr.org.au; ACTR No: ACTRN12608000206325).

30173702

Diabetes Mellitus is a non-infectious disease that is caused by insulin resistance.
Current case provides a detailed account of a 45-year female diagnosed with diabetes and coronary heart disease having complaints of pain in her joints, sadness and worry, unable to control anger, loss of interest in previous pleasurable activities, reduced interaction with others, and difficulty falling asleep.
After assessment, patient was diagnosed with 293.83 (F06.31) depression due to diabetes and coronary heart disease, with depressive features and V61.03 (Z63.5) disruption of family by separation or divorce.
Cognitive and behavioural approach was used for treatment, which significantly reduced complaints of patient.

9850002

Persistent middle ear effusion in infancy and early childhood has been blamed for impairments of speech, language, cognition and psychosocial development later in life.
Whether that blame is justified remains unresolved and a matter of controversy, because studies of the relationships involved have been limited and often contradictory and because none was designed so as to address the issue of causality.
At issue in particular is the common practice of subjecting infants and young children with persistent otitis media with effusion (OME) to tympanostomy tube placement specifically to reduce the risk of developmental impairment.
Currently children younger than age 3 years undergo an estimated 313000 tympanostomy tube placement operations per year, at a cost of about $750 million.
If a causal association between early life OME and later developmental impairment were to be established, answers would also be needed to the questions whether the adverse effects of OME are linear or threshold, whether they are permanent or transient and whether they are preventable by timely tube placement.
A prospective study designed to address all of these questions is currently under way at Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh.
The study involves enrolling a large, demographically diverse sample of normal infants before 2 months of age; monitoring them for the presence or absence of otitis media throughout the first 3 years of life; identifying those in whom OME has persisted for specified minimum periods; randomly assigning those subjects either to prompt tube placement or to delayed tube placement if OME persists; and administering a battery of standardized developmental tests to those subjects and to a sample of the others at ages 3, 4 and 6 years.
Details of the study design and procedures are described in this report.

24275670

Food and eating are often associated with ambivalent feelings: pleasure and enjoyment, but also worry and guilt.
Guilt has the potential to motivate behaviour change, but may also lead to feelings of helplessness and loss of control.
This study firstly examined whether a default association of either 'guilt' or 'celebration' with a prototypical forbidden food item (chocolate cake) was related to differences in attitudes, perceived behavioural control, and intentions in relation to healthy eating, and secondly whether the default association was related to weight change over an 18month period (and short term weight-loss in a subsample of participants with a weight-loss goal).
This study did not find any evidence for adaptive or motivational properties of guilt.
Participants associating chocolate cake with guilt did not report more positive attitudes or stronger intentions to eat healthy than did those associating chocolate cake with celebration.
Instead, they reported lower levels of perceived behavioural control over eating and were less successful at maintaining their weight over an 18month period.
Participants with a weight-loss goal who associated chocolate cake with guilt were less successful at losing weight over a 3month period compared to those associating chocolate cake with celebration.

28981834

Our view is that insomnia may be a causal factor in the occurrence of psychotic experiences such as paranoia and hallucinations.
However, the causal relationship is not established.
The aim of the study was to investigate the causal role of insomnia in psychotic experiences via a sleep restriction manipulation.
The study was a within-subjects crossover design that included a planned mediation analysis.
Sixty-eight nonclinical volunteers underwent a sleep loss condition (restricted to 4 h sleep for 3 nights) and a control condition (standard sleep) in randomized order in 2 consecutive weeks, with a weekend washout period.
Psychotic experiences (paranoia, hallucinations, grandiosity, and cognitive disorganization) and candidate mediating variables (negative affect and related processes, working memory, decision making, and perceptual processing) were assessed before and after each condition.
Actigraphy verified an average sleep duration of 5 h 15 min in the sleep loss condition, vs 6 h 58 min in the control condition.
After the sleep loss condition, relative to the control condition, participants reported significant increases in paranoia, hallucinations, and cognitive disorganization, with no significant changes in grandiosity.
The sleep loss condition was also associated with significant increases in negative affect, negative self and other cognitions, worry, and working memory impairment.
Mediation analyses indicated that changes in psychotic experiences were mediated by changes in negative affect and related processes, but not memory impairment.
The overall conclusion is that insomnia has a causal role in the occurrence of certain psychotic experiences, and that a key route is via negative affect.

30076574

BACKGROUND: Community violence is an important social determinant of health in many high-poverty, urban communities.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to explore and characterize self-described experiences of community violence among adults with chronic health conditions.
DESIGN: Qualitative study design was implemented in 2017 using in-depth, semi-structured focus groups and interviews; data were collected from two clinical sites located in geographic epicenters of high violent crime in Chicago.
PARTICIPANTS: Adult patients, ages 35 years and older, who had at least one chronic condition.
APPROACH: Data were analyzed using grounded theory and the constant comparison method.
KEY RESULTS: The overall sample (N = 51) was predominantly female (67%) and black non-Hispanic (75%); a large proportion had hypertension (65%), arthritis (55%), obesity (53%), and/or diabetes (45%).
The majority reported that a close friend or family member was seriously injured or killed due to community violence (71%); a similar proportion had never discussed their experiences of community violence with a healthcare provider (73%).
Several major themes emerged: (1) perceived risk of being targeted, (2) chronic stress and worry, (3) hypervigilance, (4) social breakdown, (5) chronic isolation, (6) constrained choice (loss of freedom), (7) limited access to material resources, and (8) inadequate healthcare responses.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients often struggled to balance the challenges imposed by community violence with the demands of living with and managing their chronic conditions.
Emergent themes may inform practical targets for addressing community violence as a social determinant of health in vulnerable populations.

24733508

While grief, emotional distress and other mental health conditions have been associated with pregnancy loss, less is known about the mental health impact of these events during subsequent pregnancies and births.
This paper examined the impact of any type of pregnancy loss on mental health in a subsequent pregnancy and postpartum.
Data were obtained from a sub-sample (N = 584) of the 1973-78 cohort of the Australian Longitudinal Study on Women's Health, a prospective cohort study that has been collecting data since 1996.
Pregnancy loss was defined as miscarriage, termination due to medical reasons, ectopic pregnancy and stillbirth.
Mental health outcomes included depression, anxiety, stress or distress, sadness or low mood, excessive worry, lack of enjoyment, and feelings of guilt.
Demographic factors and mental health history were controlled for in the analysis.
Women with a previous pregnancy loss were more likely to experience sadness or low mood (AOR = 1.75, 95% CI: 1.11 to 2.76, p = 0.0162), and excessive worry (AOR = 2.01, 95% CI: 1.24 to 3.24, p = 0.0043) during a subsequent pregnancy, but not during the postpartum phase following a subsequent birth.
These results indicate that while women who have experienced a pregnancy loss are a more vulnerable population during a subsequent pregnancy, these deficits are not evident in the postpartum.

23386529

Nurses are expected to care for grieving women and families suffering from perinatal loss.
However, these losses can also significantly impact upon the emotional state of nurses.
Failure to adjust may endanger the affected nurse's health and render him or her unable or unwilling to provide continuous quality care.
There has been little prior research addressing the effect of patient perinatal loss on nurses tasked with providing nursing care.
This paper focuses on internal perceptions and external stresses to explore the impact of this traumatic experience on nurses and related coping strategies.
We found that nurses experience a grieving process similar to those directly suffering from perinatal loss.
Nurses feel sadness, incompetence, and helplessness but dare not cry in order to protect their professional image.
They may also worry about the potential legal risks of verbalizing or otherwise expressing their feelings.
Strategies frequently used to adjust to the emotional strain include limiting his or her commitment to the patient, seeking emotional escape, and talking to colleagues.
Therefore, it is important to develop institute- or hospital-based emotional support networks and training programs and evidence-based nursing care standards for this important issue.
This paper also suggests future policies, nursing strategies and further research directions.

29552751

PURPOSE: The purpose of the present article was to investigate the health related quality of life (QoL) of young women with breast cancer.
METHODS: For the purposes of this article, we reviewed the literature via the electronic databases Pubmed, Scopus and Google Scholar.
Key words used were breast cancer, young women, health related quality of life, and quality of life.
RESULTS: Young women reported fatigue, pain in the breast and hand problems with lymphedema as the most frequent physical effects of treatment.
Other physical problems were the not periodic and painful menses, vaginal dryness and loss of libido.
Many young women had depressive symptoms such as depressed mood, helplessness, hopelessness, sleep loss, psychomotor retardation and disorders of appetite.
There were often concerns about the health monitoring and self-image, while they were anxious if they will have a baby in the future or if they can nurture the existing ones.
Many problems arose in the career of young women.
They faced discrimination in the labor supply and/or layoff because they were considered unable to do their job effectively.
In addition, they reported isolation problems and feeling different from other women of similar age.
CONCLUSIONS: Young women consider that their healthrelated QoL is worse compared with older women.
Young women worry about their future, with particular reference to their role as mothers and especially to children-bearing.
The free screening and non-exclusion of young women is particularly important for breast cancer prevention and women's well-being.

28863419

BACKGROUND: Distress in cancer patients negatively affects emotions and coping abilities and can reduce treatment adherence, quality of life, and survival rates.
The prevalence of distress in cancer patients has been reported at 35.1 percent and 37.8 percent, but is frequently undiagnosed.
Previous studies have produced conflicting results regarding reported symptoms.This study aims to help health care providers identify symptoms correlated with distress to improve recognition and treatment.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was performed via medical record review of 40 adult cancer patients at the Avera Cancer Institute.
Responses were compared using Pearson's chi-square test and the t-test.
RESULTS: The average age of participants was 56.8 +/- 12.0, and 65 percent had breast cancer.
The mean overall score for distress was 4.6 +/- 2.7 points on a 0-10 scale (95 percent CI 3.71 - 5.45).
Twenty-four patients (60 percent) reported clinically significant distress.
Females were more likely to report sadness.
Specific symptoms with a statistically significant association with a higher overall distress included: fears, depression, sleep, worry, fatigue, nervousness, eating, and loss of interest in normal activities.
Although our sample size was small and homogeneous, the results demonstrated statistically significant associations between overall distress and the symptoms of fears, depression, sleep, worry, fatigue, nervousness, eating, and loss of interest in normal activities.
These findings can increase awareness of symptoms associated with distress and allow clinicians to recommend specific interventions.
Though many oncology clinics screen for distress, distress remains an important factor affecting quality of life and warrants further investigation.

20955863

OBJECTIVE: Sleep difficulties are common in individuals exposed to stress or trauma, and maladaptive cognitive coping strategies, such as worry and fear of losing vigilance, as well as low social support, may further impair sleep quality.
This study examined the severity and correlates of sleep difficulties in a sample of treatment-seeking veterans of Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom (OEF-OIF).
METHOD: A total of 167 OEF-OIF veterans seeking behavioral or primary care services completed a questionnaire containing measures of sleep quality, combat exposure, psychopathology, fear of loss of vigilance, cognitive coping strategies, and unit and postdeployment social support within 1 year of returning from deployment.
RESULTS: Mean Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Inventory scores in the full sample were indicative of severely impaired sleep.
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) was associated with increased sleep difficulties, most notably sleep disturbances, daytime dysfunction, and sleep quality.
Hierarchical regression analysis in the full sample revealed that PTSD symptoms and scores on measures of worry and fear of loss of vigilance were positively associated with sleep difficulties and that scores on a measure of unit member support were negatively associated with sleep difficulties.
Among veterans with PTSD, fear of loss of vigilance was positively associated with sleep difficulties and cognitive distraction and unit member support were negatively associated with sleep difficulties.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment-seeking OEF-OIF veterans report severe sleep difficulties, with more pronounced impairment in veterans with PTSD.
The results of this study suggest that interventions to mitigate worry and fear of loss of vigilance and to enhance perceived unit member support may be helpful in reducing sleep difficulties following return from deployment in this population.

25254619

BACKGROUND: Although Complicated Grief (CG) has been associated with comorbid Panic Disorder (PD), little is known about panic attacks in CG, and whether panic symptoms may be grief-related.
The present study examines the presence and impact of grief-related panic symptoms in CG.
METHODS: Individuals with CG (n=146, 78% women, mean (SD) age=52.4(15.0)) were assessed for CG, DSM-IV diagnoses, work and social impairment, and with the Panic Disorder Severity Scale modified to assess symptoms "related to or triggered by reminders of your loss" and anticipatory worry.
RESULTS: Overall, 39.7% reported at least one full or limited-symptom grief-related panic attack over the past week, and 32.2% reported some level of anticipatory worry about grief-related panic.
Of interest, 17% met DSM criteria for PD.
Among those without PD, 34.7% reported at least one full or limited-symptom grief-related panic attack over the past week, and this was associated with higher CG symptom severity (t=-2.23, p<0.05), and functional impairment (t=-3.31, p<0.01).
Among the full sample, controlling for CG symptom severity and current PD, the presence of at least one full or limited-symptom grief-related panic attack was independently associated with increased functional impairment (B(SE)=4.86(1.7), p<0.01).
LIMITATIONS: Limitations include a lack of assessment of non-grief-related panic symptoms and examination of a sample of individuals seeking treatment for CG.
CONCLUSIONS: Grief-related panic symptoms may be prevalent among individuals with CG and independently contribute to distress and functional impairment.

30123880

Objective: The aim of this study is to evaluate the symptoms experience and quality of life in patients with breast cancer receiving the taxane class of drugs.
Materials and Methods: This study was performed between November 2015 March 2016 in a chemotherapy unit of a university hospital with 48 patients, who agreed to participate in the study.
The Memorial Symptom Rating Score (MSAS), Socio-demographic and Clinical Features Form, European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire (EORTC QLQ-C30) and European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire-Breast (EORTC QLQ- BR23) measures specific to breast cancer were used to obtain data.
Results: The average age of the patients was 45.65.
The majority of patients were treated with the paclitaxel/paclitaxel+trastuzumab treatment protocol (60.42%), and more than half (54.16%) of these patients were on 5 or 6 treatments.
The symptoms patients experienced the most commonly included being sensitive, weakness or energy loss and pain.
The symptoms they experienced severely were included fatigue and energy loss and being sensitive.
The most distressing symptoms were pain, worry, numbness in hands and feet.
The overall well-being score of the patients as per the quality of life findings was 46.18+/-11.66.
While the lowest score for the functional scales was in the social function subscale (66.32+/-15.18), the highest score for the symptom scales was in the pain subscale (42.01+/-15.37).
The lowest score for the EORTC QLQ-BR23 scales was in the sexual life subscale (20.83+/-20.19); the highest score was in the body appearance subscale (65.8+/-23.96).
Conclusion: The results of the study are thought to be helpful for the oncology nurses in evaluating the patients in all aspects and in determining priorities for care.

19788771

OBJECTIVE: Women with ovarian cancer face a poor prognosis, with prolonged periods of treatment but relatively high levels of physical functioning.
Their thoughts and feelings regarding the prospect of dying are complex and have not been adequately studied.
Various demographic, medical and psychosocial factors were examined to determine their independent associations with fear of dying and hopelessness in a cross-sectional design.
METHOD: Two hundred fifty-four ovarian cancer patients were assessed at the beginning of a new chemotherapy regimen.
Separate logistic regressions were performed for worry about dying and loss of hope.
For each analysis, psychosocial variables were entered after the demographic and medical variables to determine whether the psychosocial variables had an independent association with the respective outcome.
RESULTS: Fifty-five percent of the sample acknowledged fear of dying, and 31.6% acknowledged loss of hope in the fight against their illness.
Being younger (p = .001), being of non-Hispanic White ethnicity (p = .026), and having poorer physical well-being (p = .000) were significantly associated with worry about dying after controlling for all other variables in the model.
Regarding loss of hope, depressive symptoms (p = .002), lack of social support/well-being (p = .001), and number of treatments (p = .04) were significant.
SIGNIFICANCE OF RESULTS: This is one of the largest studies to examine end-of-life concerns in a sample of advanced cancer patients.
Our results underscore the importance of demographic and psychosocial variables in the examination of ovarian cancer patients' end-of-life concerns.
Their fears and concerns should be openly acknowledged, even when the clinical focus is still on curative treatment.

21330230

BACKGROUND: Although public concern has focused on the environmental impact of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, the public health impact on a broad range of coastal communities is minimally known.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine the acute level of distress (depression, anxiety), mechanisms of adjustment (coping, resilience), and perceived risk in a community indirectly impacted by the oil spill and to identify the extent to which economic loss may explain these factors.
METHODS: Using a community-based participatory model, we performed standardized assessments of psychological distress (mood, anxiety), coping, resilience, neurocognition, and perceived risk on residents of fishing communities who were indirectly impacted (n = 71, Franklin County, Florida) or directly exposed (n = 23, Baldwin County, Alabama) to coastal oil.
We also compared findings for participants who reported income stability (n = 47) versus spill-related income loss (n = 47).
RESULTS: We found no significant differences between community groups in terms of psychological distress, adjustment, neurocognition, or environmental worry.
Residents of both communities displayed clinically significant depression and anxiety.
Relative to those with stable incomes, participants with spill-related income loss had significantly worse scores on tension/anxiety, depression, fatigue, confusion, and total mood disturbance scales; had higher rates of depression; were less resilient; and were more likely to use behavioral disengagement as a coping strategy.
CONCLUSIONS: Current estimates of human health impacts associated with the oil spill may underestimate the psychological impact in Gulf Coast communities that did not experience direct exposure to oil.
Income loss after the spill may have a greater psychological health impact than the presence of oil on the immediately adjacent shoreline.

27406185

BACKGROUND: Hematopoietic stem cell transplants, alongside enzyme replacement therapy and good multi-disciplinary care, have dramatically improved the life expectancy in children with Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) I, with better objective and functional outcomes.
Despite these improvements, children with both the attenuated (non-Hurler) and severe (Hurler) variants of the disease have marked residual morbidity.
Children with MPS I suffer with head and neck disease including obstructive sleep apnoea and hearing loss.
The impact of these on quality of life has been poorly researched and no previous work has been published looking at patients' perception of their own health, an important domain when considering the impact of treatment.
METHODS: This exploratory qualitative study aimed to discover the effect of head and neck disease, alongside that of MPS I as a whole, on the quality of life of affected children.
A grounded theory approach was used to conduct this study.
Children and their parents were invited to participate in semi-structured interviews.
The transcribed interviews were coded and emergent themes explored until saturation occurred.
RESULTS: The families of eleven children with MPS I were interviewed, five with Hurler's and six with the attenuated non-Hurler's.
Important themes to emerge were- the fear of dying associated with obstructive sleep apnoea, difficulties communicating at school due to the delayed acquisition of language, chronic pain and restricted mobility, physical differences and restricted participation in social activities such as sports secondary to the musculoskeletal disease burden.
The overall theme running through the analysis was the desire to fit in with ones peers.
CONCLUSION: Parents and children with MPS 1 worry about 'fitting-in' with broader society.
The presence of airway disease has a profound impact on the emotional well being of parents whilst language delay and musculoskeletal disease have the biggest impact on the quality of life of the children themselves.
It is important to understand the impact of MPS I on the quality of life of children and their families so that we may improve future treatment and management of this sub-group of children who have an increasing life span.

27575924

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Repetitive thought is a trans-diagnostic risk-factor for development of psychopathology.
Research on repetitive thought in bereaved individuals has focused primarily on clarifying the role of rumination, repetitive thinking about past negative events and/or negative emotions.
While detrimental effects of rumination have been demonstrated following bereavement, surprisingly few studies have aimed to clarify the role of worry, repetitive thinking about potential future negative events, in adjustment to loss.
This study sought to fill this gap in knowledge.
METHODS/DESIGN: One hundred eighty-three bereaved individuals (85.3% women) filled out questionnaires on sociodemographic and loss-related characteristics, worry, and symptom measures of depression, anxiety, and prolonged grief.
After six months, 155 participants completed worry and symptom measures again.
Using multiple regression analyses, concurrent and longitudinal associations between loss-related variables, worry, and symptoms of psychopathology were examined.
RESULTS: Main results were that worry was strongly positively associated with symptoms of anxiety, depression and prolonged grief concurrently and also predicted higher levels of anxiety, depression and prolonged grief longitudinally.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings suggest that worry influences adjustment to bereavement negatively and may be a potential target in grief therapy, especially when aiming to reduce anxiety.

29732933

Little is known regarding how hypoglycemia and associated fears influence day-to-day life among adults with type 1 diabetes (T1DM) who use contemporary diabetes management strategies.
To address this gap, we performed an exploratory qualitative study with five focus groups of 30 people aged 20 to 57 years with T1DM.
Sessions were audiotaped and transcribed, and then analyzed.
Eight themes emerged: (a) hypoglycemic worry, (b) unpredictability and loss of control, (c) contending with life stress, (d) exercise benefits and challenges, (e) a changed relationship with food, (f) sleep fears, (g) a love/hate relationship with technology, and (h) coping strategies to make it better.
Fear of hypoglycemia, diabetes management, and work demands confer a high degree of stress.
Challenges surround food, exercise, and sleep.
Technology is important but does not relieve fear of hypoglycemia.
Developing strong coping skills and creating a safety net of support are necessary.

25499772

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Rumination, a risk factor in adjustment to bereavement, has often been considered a confrontation process.
However, building on research on worry in generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and rumination in post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), researchers recently developed the Rumination as Avoidance Hypothesis (RAH), which states that rumination after bereavement serves to avoid the reality of the loss.
In the present study, RAH was tested by investigating if rumination is associated with implicit loss avoidance.
METHODS: An Approach Avoidance Task (AAT) was used to assess automatic behavior tendencies.
Using a joystick, 71 persons who recently lost a first-degree relative (90.1% women), pulled stimuli toward themselves or pushed them away from themselves.
Stimuli represented the loss (picture deceased + loss word), were loss-related but ambiguous (picture deceased + neutral word; picture stranger + loss word), or were non-loss-related (picture stranger + neutral word; puzzle picture + X's).
RESULTS: Participants who ruminated more were relatively faster in pushing loss stimuli away from themselves and slower in pulling loss stimuli towards themselves, implying more rumination was associated with stronger implicit loss avoidance.
Effects were maintained after controlling for depressive or post-traumatic stress symptom levels, but not when controlling for prolonged grief symptom levels.
LIMITATIONS: Conjugally bereaved women were overrepresented in the sample, which limits generalizability of results.
The study was correlational, precluding causal inferences.
In line with RAH, rumination was positively associated with loss avoidance.
This may indicate that the application of exposure-based techniques can reduce rumination and loss-related psychopathology.

17888398

According to Wells' metacognitive model of generalised anxiety disorder (GAD; [Wells, A.
(1995).
Meta-cognition and worry: A cognitive model of generalised anxiety disorder.
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 23, 301-320]), GAD patients attempt to suppress intrusions that trigger worry.
Wells postulates that these attempts are rarely effective and may increase the frequency of worry triggers.
These apparent failures are interpreted as evidence for loss of mental control, thereby exacerbating beliefs about worry uncontrollability.
The current study tested these predictions.
Sixty-two high worriers completed a naturalistic experiment comprising two sessions separated by 1 week.
In Session 1, participants recorded their beliefs about worry in general, including its uncontrollability.
They then selected a current worry and recorded how often it came to mind over the following week.
The Suppression group (N=32) suppressed their chosen worry during the week.
The Mention group (N=30) simply monitored its occurrence.
In Session 2, Session 1 measures were repeated.
Contrary to prediction, the Suppression group reported a significant increase in worry controllability in general.
No shift was demonstrated by the Mention group.
In addition, relative to the Mention group, the Suppression group reported more success at suppressing their chosen worries, spent less time thinking about them, and found them more controllable and less distressing.
Findings are discussed within the context of Wells' model.

30140087

To elucidate the psychiatric characteristics of mothers and the supportive behavior of their partners during late pregnancy, 131 mothers who gave birth at 2 general hospitals in City A between August 2009 and September 2010 (control group: n=90; recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) group: n=41) completed a self-administered questionnaire on four separate occasions: during late pregnancy, during hospitalization, at 1-month postpartum, and at 3-months postpartum.
The RPL group had significantly (p=0.03) lower anxiety regarding potential change in their appearance than the controls, but were more likely to worry about losing their baby (58% vs. 38%) (p=0.021).
At 3-months postpartum, the RPL group reported having had more stress during pregnancy than the controls (49% vs. 31%; p=0.041).
There were no significant differences in state or trait anxiety (State-Trait Anxiety Inventory) between the 2 groups at any of the four measurements.
However, state anxiety decreased significantly throughout the hospitalization for controls (p <0.001), but did not decrease significantly for the RPL group until 3 months postpartum (p<0.05).
RPL participants who expressed high satisfaction with their partners' supportive behavior received significantly greater psychological support than did participants with low satisfaction.
Healthcare professionals should attempt to support both members of RPL couples.

28316567

Despite the success of available medical and psychosocial treatments, a sizable subgroup of individuals with commonly co-occurring disorders, generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and major depressive disorder (MDD), fail to make sufficient treatment gains thereby prolonging their deficits in life functioning and satisfaction.
Clinically, these patients often display temperamental features reflecting heightened sensitivity to underlying motivational systems related to threat/safety and reward/loss (e.g., somatic anxiety) as well as inordinate negative self-referential processing (e.g., worry, rumination).
This profile may reflect disruption in two important neural networks associated with emotional/motivational salience (e.g., salience network) and self-referentiality (e.g., default network, DN).
Emotion Regulation Therapy (ERT) was developed to target this hypothesized profile and its neurobehavioral markers.
In the present study, 22 GAD patients (with and without MDD) completed resting state MRI scans before receiving 16 sessions of ERT.
To test study these hypotheses, we examined the associations between baseline patterns of intrinsic functional connectivity (iFC) of the insula and of hubs within the DN (anterior and dorsal medial prefrontal cortex [MPFC] and posterior cingulate cortex [PCC]) and treatment-related changes in worry, somatic anxiety symptoms and decentering.
Results suggest that greater treatment linked reductions in worry were associated with iFC clusters in both the insular and parietal cortices.
Greater treatment linked gains in decentering, a metacognitive process that involves the capacity to observe items that arise in the mind with healthy psychological distance that is targeted by ERT, was associated with iFC clusters in the anterior and posterior DN.
The current study adds to the growing body of research implicating disruptions in the default and salience networks as promising targets of treatment for GAD with and without co-occurring MDD.

29729300

The feedback negativity (FN) event-related potential (ERP) is widely studied during gambling feedback tasks.
However, research on FN and anxiety is minimal and the findings are mixed.
To clarify these discrepancies, the current study (N=238) used time-frequency analysis to disentangle overlapping contributions of delta (0-3Hz) and theta (3-7Hz) to feedback processing in a clinically anxious sample, with severity assessed through general worry and physiological arousal scales.
Greater general worry showed enhanced delta- and theta-FN broadly across both gain and loss conditions, with theta-FN stronger for losses.
Regressions indicated delta-FN maintained unique effects, accounted for theta, and explained the blunted time domain FN for general worry.
Increased delta was also associated with physiological arousal, but the effects were accounted for by general worry.
Broadly, anxiety-related alterations in feedback processing can be explained by an overall heightened sensitivity to feedback as represented by enhanced delta-FN in relation to the general worry facet of anxiety.

29778506

OBJECTIVES: The goals of treating recurrent platinum-resistant ovarian cancer are palliative, aimed at reducing symptoms and improving progression free survival.
A prospective trial was conducted to determine the prevalence and severity of symptoms, and associated care needs.
METHODS: Eligible women included those with persistent or recurrent platinum-resistant ovarian cancer with an estimated life expectancy of at least 6months.
The Needs at the End-of-Life Screening Tool (NEST), FACIT-Fatigue (FACIT-F), NCCN-FACT Ovarian Symptom Index [NFOSI-18]; Disease Related Symptoms (DRS), Treatment Side Effects (TSE), and Function/Well Being (F/WB) were collected at study entry, 3 and 6months.
RESULTS: We enrolled 102 evaluable patients.
Initiation of Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) discussions increased over time from 28% at study entry to 37% at 6months.
At study entry, the most common disease-related symptoms were fatigue (92%), worry (89%), and trouble sleeping (76%); 73% reported being "bothered by treatment side effects", which included nausea (41%) and hair loss (51%) neither of which changed over time.
The most common NEST unmet needs were in the symptom dimension.
The social dimension was associated with F/WB (p=0.002) and FACIT-F (p=0.006); symptoms were associated with DRS (p=0.04), TSE (p=0.03), and FACIT-F (p=0.04); existential was not associated with any of the patient-reported symptoms; therapeutic was associated with F/WB (p=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients nearing the end of life, there are significant associations between disease and treatment related symptoms and unmet patient needs, which do not change substantially over time.
Careful exploration of specific end-of-life care needs can improve patient-centered care and QOL.

======================================================================
Potential_Threat_Anxiety_
======================================================================
27576271

Temporal phases of threat response, including potential threat (anxiety), acute threat (startle, fear), and post-threat response modulation, have been identified as the underlying markers of anxiety disorders.
Objective measures of response during these phases may help identify children at risk for anxiety; however, the complexity of current assessment techniques prevent their adoption in many research and clinical contexts.
We propose an alternative technology, an inertial measurement unit (IMU), that enables noninvasive measurement of the movements associated with threat response, and test its ability to detect threat response phases in young children at a heightened risk for developing anxiety.
We quantified the motion of 18 children (3-7 years old) during an anxiety-/fear-provoking behavioral task using an IMU.
Specifically, measurements from a single IMU secured to the child's waist were used to extract root-mean-square acceleration and angular velocity in the horizontal and vertical directions, and tilt and yaw range of motion during each threat response phase.
IMU measurements detected expected differences in child motion by threat phase.
Additionally, potential threat motion was positively correlated to familial anxiety risk, startle range of motion was positively correlated with child internalizing symptoms, and response modulation motion was negatively correlated to familial anxiety risk.
Results suggest differential theory-driven threat response phases and support previous literature connecting maternal child risk to anxiety with behavioral measures using more feasible objective methods.
This is the first study demonstrating the utility of an IMU for characterizing the motion of young children to mark the phases of threat response modulation.
The technique provides a novel and objective measure of threat response for mental health researchers.

28206795

Although cognitive theories of psychopathology suggest that attention bias toward threat plays a role in the etiology and maintenance of anxiety, there is relatively little evidence regarding individual differences in the earliest development of attention bias toward threat.
The current study examines attention bias toward threat during its potential first emergence by evaluating the relations between attention bias and known risk factors of anxiety (i.e., temperamental negative affect and maternal anxiety).
We measured attention bias to emotional faces in infants (N = 98; 57 male) ages 4 to 24 months during an attention disengagement eye-tracking paradigm.
We hypothesized that (a) there would be an attentional bias toward threat in the full sample of infants, replicating previous studies; (b) attentional bias toward threat would be positively related to maternal anxiety; and (c) attention bias toward threat would be positively related to temperamental negative affect.
Finally, (d) we explored the potential interaction between temperament and maternal anxiety in predicting attention bias toward threat.
We found that attention bias to the affective faces did not change with age, and that bias was not related to temperament.
However, attention bias to threat, but not attention bias to happy faces, was positively related to maternal anxiety, such that higher maternal anxiety predicted a larger attention bias for all infants.
These findings provide support for attention bias as a putative early mechanism by which early markers of risk are associated with socioemotional development (PsycINFO Database Record)

27055095

Emotion regulation has important consequences for emotional and mental health (Saxena, Dubey & Pandey, 2011) and is dependent on executive function (Eisenberg, Smith & Spinrad, 2011).
Because state anxiety disrupts executive function (Robinson, Vytal, Cornwell & Grillon, 2013), we tested whether state anxiety disrupts emotion regulation by having participants complete an instructed emotion regulation task, while under threat of unpredictable shock and while safe from shock.
We used the late positive potential (LPP) component of the event related potential to measure emotion regulation success.
We predicted that LPP responses to negatively valenced images would be modulated by participants' attempts to increase and decrease their emotions when safe from shock, but not while under threat of shock.
Our manipulation check revealed an order effect such that for participants who completed the threat of shock condition first self-reported state anxiety carried over into the subsequent safe condition.
Additionally, we found that although instructions to regulate affected participants' ratings of how unpleasant the images made them feel, instructions to regulate had no effect on LPP amplitude regardless of threat condition.
Instead we found that participants who received the threat condition prior to safe had greater LPP responses to all images in the safe condition.
We posit that the carryover of anxiety resulted in misattribution of arousal and potentiation of neural responses to the images in the safe condition.
Thus, our results imply that physiological arousal and cognition combine to influence the basic neural response to emotional stimuli (PsycINFO Database Record)

27375030

Group-based Transdiagnostic Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (TCBT) for anxiety disorders aims to target common factors to produce beneficial effects on multiple anxiety disorders at once.
While there is growing evidence that various anxiety disorders can be effectively treated by this approach, the common factors contributing to these treatment effects are not well delineated.
In a sample of 48 Veterans who completed Group-based TCBT, the current study examined change in threat perception and change in experiential avoidance pre to post-treatment and as potential mediators of changes in negative affect and personalized fear ratings.
Results indicated that both threat perception and experiential avoidance were significantly reduced during treatment.
Additionally, reductions in both threat perception and experiential avoidance significantly predicted reductions in negative affect and fear ratings.
When change in threat perception and change in experiential avoidance were examined simultaneously, both remained significant predictors of changes in negative affect though only experiential avoidance predicted changes in fear ratings.
Thus, both reductions in threat perception and experiential avoidance may mediate the broad treatment effects observed in group-based TCBT.
Directions for future research are discussed.

27395806

Cognitive models posit that social anxiety disorder (SAD) is associated with and maintained by biased attention allocation vis-a-vis social threat.
However, over the last decade, there has been intense debate regarding whether AB in SAD results from preferential engagement with or difficulty in disengaging from social threat.
Further, recent evidence suggests that AB may merely result from top-down attentional impairments vis-a-vis non-emotional material.
Consequently, uncertainty still abounds regarding both the relative importance and the mutual interactions of these different processes and SAD symptoms.
Inspired by novel network approaches to psychopathology that conceptualize symptoms as complex dynamic systems of mutually interacting variables, we computed weighted directed networks to investigate potential causal relations among laboratory measures of attentional components and symptoms of social anxiety disorder.
Global and local connectivity of network structures revealed that the three most central variables were the orienting component of attention as well as both avoidance and fear of social situations.
Neither preferential attention engagement with threat nor difficulty disengaging from threat exhibited high relative importance as predictors of symptoms in the network.
Together, these findings suggest the value of extending the network approach beyond self-reported clinical symptoms to incorporate process-level measures from laboratory tasks to gain new insight into the mechanisms of SAD.

24286750

Theoretical frameworks of anxiety propose that attentional biases to threat-related stimuli cause or maintain anxious states.
The current paper draws on theoretical frameworks and key empirical studies to outline the distinctive attentional processes highlighted as being important in understanding anxiety.
We develop a conceptual framework to make a distinction between two attentional biases: selective attention to threat and hypervigilance for threat.
We suggest that these biases each have a different purpose and can account for the typical patterns of facilitated and impaired attention evident in anxious individuals.
The framework is novel in its specification of the eye movement behavior associated with these attentional biases.
We highlight that selective attention involves narrowing overt attention onto threat to ensure that these stimuli receive processing priority, leading to rapid engagement with task-relevant threat and delayed disengagement from task-irrelevant threat.
We show that hypervigilance operates in the presence and absence of threat and involves monitoring for potential dangers via attentional broadening or excessive scanning of the environment with numerous eye movements, leading to improved threat detection and increased distraction from task-irrelevant threat.
We conclude that future research could usefully employ eye movement measures to more clearly understand the diverse roles of attention in anxiety.

25969398

Researchers have only recently begun using functional neuroimaging to explore the human response to periods of sustained anxious anticipation, namely potential threat.
Here, we investigated brain responses acquired with functional MRI during an instructed threat of shock paradigm used to create sustained periods of aversive anticipation.
In this re-analysis of previously published data, we employed quadratic discriminant analysis to classify the multivariate pattern of whole-brain functional connectivity and to identify connectivity changes during periods of potential threat.
Our method identifies clusters with altered connectivity on a voxelwise basis, thus eschewing the need to define regions a priori.
Classifier generalization was evaluated by testing on data from participants not used during training.
Robust classification between threat and safe contexts was possible, and inspection of "diagnostic features" revealed altered functional connectivity involving the intraparietal sulcus, task-negative regions, striatum, and anterior cingulate cortex.
We anticipate that the proposed method will prove useful to experimenters wishing to identify large-scale functional networks that distinguish between experimental conditions or groups.

26773206

In their adaptive control hypothesis, Cavanagh and Shackman (2015) recently claimed that dispositional anxiety is correlated with frontal-midline theta (FMtheta) as a generic "need for control" signal of the anterior midcingulate cortex.
Here, we tested this assumption, also considering potential modulatory influences of anticipatory threat and individuals' sex.
In a nonclinical sample of 168 participants (84 women), electroencephalogram was recorded while individuals performed a simple two-choice task.
Half of the participants were assigned to a threat anticipation condition (anticipation of public speaking), whereas the other half was assigned to a control condition.
State anxiety was monitored across the experiment.
Dispositional anxiety was assessed by self-report scales, which were completed before individuals came to the laboratory.
Target stimuli in the two-choice task induced a transient increase in FMtheta power that was subject to an interaction of dispositional anxiety, sex, and experimental group.
Only in women who anticipated public speaking did we observe a substantial positive relation between dispositional anxiety and general FMtheta power.
Our results indicate that the link between dispositional anxiety and FMtheta is not universal but rather depends on complex interactions of individuals' sex and situational threat.

26005838

There is growing evidence that heightened sensitivity to unpredictable threat is a core mechanism of dysfunction in anxiety disorders.
However, it is unclear whether anxiety sensitivity is also associated with sensitivity to unpredictable threat.
In the present study, 131 participants completed the Anxiety Sensitivity Index-3, which includes physical concerns (PC), social concerns (SC), and cognitive concerns (CC) subscales, and a predictable vs. unpredictable threat-of-shock task.
Startle eyeblink and ERP responses (N100, P300) to the acoustic startle probes were measured during the task.
PC and CC were associated with heightened and attenuated, respectively, startle for the unpredictable (but not predictable) condition.
CC were also associated with attenuated probe N100 for the unpredictable condition only, and PC were associated with increased P300 suppression across the predictable and unpredictable conditions.
This study provides novel evidence that the different anxiety sensitivity dimensions demonstrate unique relationships with the RDoC domains "acute" and "potential" threat.

23818424

H1N1 reached pandemic proportions in 2009, yet considerable ambivalence was apparent concerning the threat presented and the inclination to be vaccinated.
The present investigation assessed several factors, notably appraisals of the threat, intolerance of uncertainty, and familiarity with the virus, that might contribute to reactions to a potential future viral threat.
Canadian adults (N = 316) provided with several scenarios regarding viral threats reported moderate feelings of anxiety, irrespective of whether the viral threat was one that was familiar versus one that was entirely unfamiliar to them (H1N1 recurrence, H5N1, a fictitious virus: D3N4).
Participants appraised the stressfulness of the threats to be moderate and believed that they would have control in this situation.
However, among individuals with high intolerance of uncertainty, the viral threat was accompanied by high levels of anxiety, which was mediated by aspects of appraisals, particularly control and stressfulness.
In addition, among those individuals that generally appraised ambiguous life events as being stressful, the viral threat appraisals were accompanied by still greater anxiety.
Given the limited response to potential viral threats, these results raise concerns that the public may be hesitant to heed recommendations should another pandemic occur.

25462110

Despite the established evidence for threat-related attention bias in anxiety, the mechanisms underlying this bias remain unclear.
One important unresolved question is whether disorder-congruent threats capture attention to a greater extent than do more general or disorder-incongruent threat stimuli.
Evidence for attention bias specificity in anxiety would implicate involvement of previous learning and memory processes in threat-related attention bias, whereas lack of content specificity would point to perturbations in more generic attention processes.
Enhanced clarity of mechanism could have clinical implications for the stimuli types used in Attention Bias Modification Treatments (ABMT).
Content specificity of threat-related attention bias in anxiety and potential moderators of this effect were investigated.
A systematic search identified 37 samples from 29 articles (N=866).
Relevant data were extracted based on specific coding rules, and Cohen's d effect size was used to estimate bias specificity effects.
The results indicate greater attention bias toward disorder-congruent relative to disorder-incongruent threat stimuli (d=0.28, p<0.0001).
This effect was not moderated by age, type of anxiety disorder, visual attention tasks, or type of disorder-incongruent stimuli.
No evidence of publication bias was observed.
Implications for threat bias in anxiety and ABMT are discussed.

22906122

Cognitive biases are known to play an important role in anxiety.
In this study we investigate whether maternal anxiety is associated with biases in interpretation, attention, and catastrophic processing about self-referent stimuli that may signal potential threat in the mother's own environment.
We also investigate whether maternal anxiety is associated with biases about stimuli that their own child may encounter or to child-related stimuli more broadly.
Three hundred mothers with a child aged 6 to 10 years participated.
All participants completed a trait anxiety measure and an ambiguous sentences task to assess interpretation bias for self- and child-referent situations.
A subset of the sample completed a catastrophizing interview about a self- (n = 194) or child-referent (n = 99) worry topic and an attentional dot-probe task (n = 99) with general threat and child threat stimuli.
Maternal anxiety was not significantly associated with an attentional bias for general or child threat stimuli but was significantly associated with a bias for threat interpretations of both self and child-referent situations.
Higher maternal anxiety was also significantly associated with generating more catastrophic outcomes to both a self-referent and child-referent hypothetical worry situation.
We consider whether maternal cognitive biases, which extend to influence how mothers process potential threats in their child's world, may be an important mechanism through which intergenerational transmission of anxiety could occur.

26004056

Research evidence has suggested that anxiety influences gait in PD, with an identified dopa-sensitive gait response in highly anxious PD.
It has been well-established that accurate perception of the environment and sensory feedback is essential for gait.
Arguably since sensory and perceptual deficits have been noted in PD, anxiety has the potential to exacerbate movement impairments, since one might expect that reducing resources needed to overcome or compensate for sensory-perceptual deficits may lead to even more severe gait impairments.
It is possible that anxiety in threatening situations might consume more processing resources, limiting the ability to process information about the environment or one's own movement (sensory feedback) especially in highly anxious PD.
Therefore, the current study aimed to (i) evaluate whether processing of threat-related aspects of the environment was influenced by anxiety, (ii) evaluate whether anxiety influences the ability to utilize sensory feedback in PD while walking in threatening situations, and (iii) further understand the role of dopaminergic medication on these processes in threatening situations in PD.
Forty-eight participants (24 HC; 12 Low Anxious [LA-PD], 12 Highly Anxious [HA-PD]) completed 20 walking trials in virtual reality across a plank that was (i) located on the ground (GROUND) (ii) located above a deep pit (ELEVATED); while provided with or without visual feedback about their lower limbs (+VF; -VF).
After walking across the plank, participants were asked to judge the width of the plank they had just walked across.
The plank varied in size from 60-100 cm.
Both ON and OFF dopaminergic medication states were evaluated in PD.
Gait parameters, judgment error and self-reported anxiety levels were measured.
Results showed that HA-PD reported greater levels of anxiety overall (p<0.001) compared to HC and LA-PD, and all participants reported greater anxiety during the ELEVATED condition compared to GROUND (p=0.01).
PD had similar judgment error as HC.
Additionally, medication state did not significantly influence judgment error in PD.
More importantly, HA-PD were the only group that did not adjust their step width when feedback was provided during the GROUND condition.
However, medication facilitated a reduction in ST-CV when visual feedback was available only in the HA-PD group.
Therefore, the current study provides evidence that anxiety may interfere with information processing, especially utilizing sensory feedback while walking.
Dopaminergic medication appears to improve utilization of sensory feedback in stressful situations by reducing anxiety and/or improving resource allocation especially in those with PD who are highly anxious.

29607460

Late-stage attentional processing of threatening stimuli, quantified through event-related potentials (ERPs), differentiates youth with and without anxiety disorders.
It is unknown whether early-stage attentional processing of threatening stimuli differentiates these groups.
Examining both early and late stage attentional processes in youth may advance knowledge and enhance efforts to identify biomarkers for translational prevention and treatment research.
Twenty-one youth with primary DSM-IV-TR anxiety disorders (10 males, ages 8-15 years) and 21 typically developing Controls (15 males, ages 8-16 years) completed a dot probe task while electroencephalography (EEG) was recorded, and ERPs were examined.
Youth with anxiety disorders showed significantly larger (more positive) P1 amplitudes for threatening stimuli than for neutral stimuli, and Controls showed the opposite pattern.
Youth with anxiety showed larger (more negative) N170 amplitudes compared with Controls.
Controls showed significantly larger (more positive) P2 and P3 amplitudes, regardless of stimuli valence, compared with youth with anxiety disorders.
ERPs observed during the dot probe task indicate youth with anxiety disorders display distinct neural processing during early stage attentional orienting and processing of faces; this was not the case for Controls.
Such results suggest these ERP components may have potential as biomarkers of anxiety disorders in youth.

21939773

How does threat processing impact cognitive performance?
To investigate this question, in the present functional magnetic resonance imaging study, participants performed a response-conflict task (neutral, congruent, and incongruent trials) that followed a variable-length shock anticipation period or a corresponding delay during which they would not be shocked.
The delay period was cued by a geometric-shaped stimulus indicating whether the subject was in the safe (no shock) or threat (potential shock) condition.
Behaviorally, participants showed increased reaction time interference (incongruent-neutral) during threat trials, an effect that increased as a function of state anxiety level across participants.
Brain imaging data were analyzed for the cue and the subsequent target phase of the task.
At the target phase, the left anterior insula exhibited interaction-type responses (i.e., increased interference during threat trials) that were positively associated with state anxiety level - a relationship that paralleled the behavioral pattern.
At the cue phase, greater responses to threat vs. safe were observed in a circuit of regions, including the medial PFC, anterior insula, thalamus, and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis/caudate, which we interpreted as engaged by shock monitoring/anticipation processes.
In contrast, intriguingly, greater responses to safe vs. threat at the cue phase were observed in a broader set of regions that overlapped with the "resting-state" network.
Finally, a standard statistical mediation analysis revealed that the relationship between state anxiety scores and interference-related responses in the left anterior insula during the target phase was partially mediated via cue responses in the medial PFC, consistent with the idea that more anxious individuals had difficulty in engaging the medial PFC during the threat condition.
Taken together, our findings suggest that threat monitoring impairs the upcoming resolution of interference.
Furthermore, a confluence of effects of cognitive task condition, threat, and individual differences in state anxiety was observed in the anterior insula, a structure that is suggested to be particularly important for the interaction between emotion and cognition.

29980493

BACKGROUND: The antihypertensive drug losartan has been shown to improve memory in humans as well as learning and fear extinction in rodent models, highlighting its potential to have similar synergistic effects on exposure-based cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety disorders.
This study investigated the effect of losartan on neural correlates of processing threat versus safety stimuli in highly anxious individuals to identify potential pathways of how the drug might facilitate psychological treatment.
METHODS: Thirty healthy volunteers high in trait anxiety were randomly assigned to a single dose of losartan (50 mg) versus placebo before undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging.
We measured brain response to happy and fearful faces presented for 80 seconds to assess emotional processing and habituation over time.
RESULTS: The placebo group showed similarly high left amygdala activation early on during presentation of fearful and happy faces, which decreased over time.
In contrast, losartan reduced amygdala response to happy faces early on.
In response to fearful faces, the drug prevented habituation, caused sustained amygdala activation, and led to increased activation in other brain areas associated with threat processing, such as the insula and putamen.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest two distinct effects of losartan on emotional processing, including an improvement of early discrimination of stimuli as threatening versus safe, and facilitation of threat processing.
Both processes are known to be relevant for successful exposure, highlighting two potential pathways by which losartan might exert facilitative effects on psychological treatment.

26210058

BACKGROUND: The difficulty in treating mood disorders has brought about clinical interest in alternative treatments, such as transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC).
However, the optimal parameters for stimulation and underlying mechanisms of action are unclear.
Psychiatric treatments have acute effects on emotional processing that predict later therapeutic action.
Such effects have been proposed as cognitive biomarkers for screening novel treatments for depression and anxiety.
METHODS: This study assessed the effect of tDCS on a battery of emotional processing measures sensitive to antidepressant action.
To refine optimal stimulation parameters, DLPFC stimulation using two common electrode montages was compared with sham.
Sixty healthy volunteers received 20 minutes of active or sham DLPFC stimulation before completing computerized emotional processing tasks, including a dot-probe measure of vigilance to threat.
RESULTS: Relative to sham stimulation, participants receiving simultaneous anodal stimulation of left DLPFC and cathodal stimulation of right DLPFC (bipolar-balanced montage) showed reduced vigilance to threatening stimuli.
There was no such significant effect when the cathode was placed on the supraorbital ridge (bipolar-unbalanced montage).
There were no effects of tDCS on other measures of emotional processing.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide the first experimental evidence that modulating activity in the DLPFC reduces vigilance to threatening stimuli.
This significant reduction in fear vigilance is similar to that seen with anxiolytic treatments in the same cognitive paradigm.
The finding that DLPFC tDCS acutely alters the processing of threatening information suggests a potential cognitive mechanism that could underwrite treatment effects in clinical populations.

28838469

BACKGROUND: Anxious hypervigilance is marked by sensitized sensory-perceptual processes and attentional biases to potential danger cues in the environment.
How this is realized at the neurocomputational level is unknown but could clarify the brain mechanisms disrupted in psychiatric conditions such as posttraumatic stress disorder.
Predictive coding, instantiated by dynamic causal models, provides a promising framework to ground these state-related changes in the dynamic interactions of reciprocally connected brain areas.
METHODS: Anxiety states were elicited in healthy participants (n = 19) by exposure to the threat of unpredictable, aversive shocks while undergoing magnetoencephalography.
An auditory oddball sequence was presented to measure cortical responses related to deviance detection, and dynamic causal models quantified deviance-related changes in effective connectivity.
Participants were also administered alprazolam (double-blinded, placebo-controlled crossover) to determine whether the cortical effects of threat-induced anxiety are reversed by acute anxiolytic treatment.
RESULTS: Deviant tones elicited increased auditory cortical responses under threat.
Bayesian analyses revealed that hypervigilant responding was best explained by increased postsynaptic gain in primary auditory cortex activity as well as modulation of feedforward, but not feedback, coupling within a temporofrontal cortical network.
Increasing inhibitory gamma-aminobutyric acidergic action with alprazolam reduced anxiety and restored feedback modulation within the network.
CONCLUSIONS: Threat-induced anxiety produced unbalanced feedforward signaling in response to deviations in predicable sensory input.
Amplifying ascending sensory prediction error signals may optimize stimulus detection in the face of impending threats.
At the same time, diminished descending sensory prediction signals impede perceptual learning and may, therefore, underpin some of the deleterious effects of anxiety on higher-order cognition.

22178453

Functionally, anxiety serves to increase vigilance towards aversive stimuli and improve the ability to detect and avoid danger.
We have recently shown, for instance, that anxiety increases the ability to a) detect and b) instigate defensive responses towards aversive and not appetitive face stimuli in healthy individuals.
This is arguably the key adaptive function of anxiety, yet the neural circuitry underlying this valence-specific effect is unknown.
In the present translational study, we sought evidence for the proposition that dorsomedial regions of the prefrontal (DMPFC) and cingulate cortex constitute the human homologue of the rodent prelimbic and are thus associated with increased amygdala responding during this adaptive threat bias in anxiety.
To this end, we applied a novel functional connectivity analysis to healthy subjects (N=20) identifying the emotion of fearful and happy faces in an fMRI scanner under anxious (threat of unpredictable foot shock) and non-anxious (safe) conditions.
We showed that anxiety significantly increased positive DMPFC-amygdala connectivity during the processing of fearful faces.
This effect was a) valence-specific (it was not seen for happy faces), b) paralleled by faster behavioral response to fearful faces, and c) correlated positively with trait anxiety.
As such we provide the first experimental support for an anxiety-mediated, valence-specific, DMPFC-amygdala aversive amplification mechanism in healthy humans.
This may be homologous to the rodent prelimbic-amygdala circuit and may, given the relationship with trait anxiety, underlie vulnerability to anxiety disorders.
This study thus pinpoints a key neural mechanism in adaptive anxiety and highlights its potential link to maladaptive anxiety.

22487103

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Physiological arousal serves to maintain social anxiety disorder by skewing self-perception.
Anxiety sensitivity is associated with the disorder and exaggerated perceptions of arousal, but has not been tested as explaining exaggerated perceived arousal in social contexts.
The aim of this investigation was to address this issue.
METHODS: A total of 42 individuals participated in three tasks associated with potential social threat (i.e., a speech, typing task, hyperventilation) and completed measures of trait social anxiety and anxiety sensitivity.
State anxiety, perceived arousal, and objective arousal were assessed during each task.
RESULTS: Trait social anxiety and anxiety sensitivity were correlated with state anxiety and perceived arousal, but not objective arousal, during the tasks.
Anxiety sensitivity mediated the relationships between trait social anxiety and perceived arousal and between trait social anxiety and state anxiety for the typing and hyperventilation tasks.
LIMITATIONS: Although the sample likely included a number of individuals with social anxiety disorder, the sample was mostly comprised of individuals without a diagnosis.
The current results can be extended to clinical presentations to some extent, but future research is needed to further explore the demonstrated relationships in samples of individuals with social anxiety disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: Anxiety sensitivity may play a crucial role in perceptions of arousal and state anxiety in the context of potential social threats, warranting attention from researchers and clinicians focussing on social anxiety disorder.

29515476

The emergence of anxiety during childhood is accompanied by the development of attentional biases to threat.
However, the neural mechanisms underlying these biases are poorly understood.
In addition, previous research has not examined whether state and trait anxiety are independently associated with threat-related biases.
We compared ERP waveforms during the processing of emotional faces in a population sample of 58 6-11-year-olds who completed self-reported measures of trait and state anxiety and depression.
The results showed that the P1 was larger to angry than neutral faces in the left hemisphere, though early components (P1, N170) were not strongly associated with child anxiety or depression.
In contrast, Late Positive Potential (LPP) amplitudes to angry (vs. neutral) faces were significantly and positively associated with symptoms of anxiety/depression.
In addition, the difference between LPPs for angry (vs. neutral) faces was independently associated with state and trait anxiety symptoms.
The results showed that neural responses to facial emotion in children with elevated symptoms of anxiety and depression were most evident at later processing stages characterized as evaluative and effortful.
The findings support cognitive models of threat perception in anxiety and indicate that trait elements of anxiety and more transitory fluctuations in anxious affect are important in understanding individual variation in the neural response to threat in late childhood.

21376745

Amygdala reactivity to threat-related distractor stimuli can be abolished in perceptually demanding contexts.
Premised on the biological imperative to respond swiftly to threat, we demonstrate, however, that when participants are threatened by shock, greater amygdala responses to fearful compared to neutral distractor faces is preserved under conditions of high attentional demand.
Lateral prefrontal cortices also showed selective responding to fearful distractor faces under these conditions, suggesting that threat-related distractor stimuli engaged attentional control mechanisms.
We conclude that anxiety elicited by looming threat promotes neurocognitive processes that broaden attention and enhance sensitivity to potential danger cues, even when perceptual systems are taxed.

28985425

Developing a better understanding of how and under what circumstances alcohol affects the emotions, cognitions and neural functions that precede and contribute to dangerous behaviors during intoxication may help to reduce their occurrence.
Alcohol intoxication has recently been shown to reduce defensive reactivity and anxiety more during uncertain vs certain threat.
However, alcohol's effects on emotionally motivated attention to these threats are unknown.
Alcohol may disrupt both affective response to and attentional processing of uncertain threats making intoxicated individuals less able to avoid dangerous and costly behaviors.
To test this possibility, we examined the effects of a broad range of blood alcohol concentrations on 96 participants' sub-cortically mediated defensive reactivity (startle potentiation), retrospective subjective anxiety (self-report) and cortically assessed emotionally motivated attention (probe P3 event related potential) while they experienced visually cued uncertain and certain location electric shock threat.
As predicted, alcohol decreased defensive reactivity and subjective anxiety more during uncertain vs certain threat.
In a novel finding, alcohol dampened emotionally motivated attention during uncertain but not certain threat.
This effect appeared independent of alcohol's effects on defensive reactivity and subjective anxiety.
These results suggest that alcohol intoxication dampens processing of uncertain threats while leaving processing of certain threats intact.

28828218

BACKGROUND: Mood and anxiety disorders are characterized by altered prefrontal-amygdala function and increased behavioral inhibition (BI) in response to potential threat.
Whether these alterations constitute a vulnerability or a symptom of illness remains unclear.
The medial orbitofrontal cortex (mOFC) is thought to play a central role in estimating probability and cost of threat, in turn informing selection of subsequent behaviors.
To better understand the behavioral and neural processes that may be associated with risk for psychopathology, we used a virtual reality paradigm to examine behavioral and neural responses of psychiatrically healthy adults with familial history of affective disorders during anticipation of unpredictable threat.
METHODS: Twenty psychiatrically healthy adults with high familial risk for affective disorders and 20 low-risk matched controls underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging concurrent with a paradigm in which they explored virtual contexts associated with the threat of shock or safety from shock.
Subjective anxiety ratings, skin conductance, exploratory behavior, and neural responses were examined for threat versus safe conditions.
RESULTS: High-risk adults evidenced greater right mOFC activation, as well as greater BI, compared to low-risk adults.
There were no significant group differences in subjective ratings or autonomic responses.
Individuals exhibiting greater activity in the right mOFC showed greater BI and decreased skin conductance response.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that BI and mOFC recruitment during anticipation of aversive outcomes may reflect a vulnerability for affective disorders.
However, such a response may also serve as a compensatory response, protecting these high-risk individuals from negative outcomes (i.e., increased physiological arousal).
These results suggest that the OFC may play a central role in driving threat-related behaviors and thus may be a target for efforts aimed at early detection or prevention.

17598732

Analysis of threat is thought to involve a "quick and dirty" stage in conjunction with slower processing that is more complete.
We investigated both types of threat analysis by recording brain potentials in response to threat and neutral words.
Personality testing was used to identify participants who were either high or low in trait anxiety (TA).
An observed enhancement of occipital P1 potentials to threat words during an emotional Stroop task was interpreted as a signal of unconscious processing, since it was early, independent of whether word exposure was subliminal or supraliminal, and more prominent the higher the level of TA.
Later positive potentials were also enhanced for threat versus neutral words, but the amplitude enhancement increased with higher TA only in the subliminal condition.
These results suggest that unconscious analysis of threat is intensified in those prone to anxiety, as is a later stage of threat processing subject to dynamic interactions between automatic and strategic influences.

27614663

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Given that anxiety runs in families, it is critical to understand the cognitive factors that may be responsible for this intergenerational transmission.
The present study offers a first step by exploring the link between mother and father tendencies to view potentially threatening situations as rapidly escalating toward dreaded outcomes (i.e., looming cognitive style) and the emotional disturbances and looming cognitive styles of their adult offspring.
METHODS: We assessed cognitive vulnerabilities, anxiety, and depressive symptoms in a non-clinical sample (N = 382) of Italian college students and their parents.
RESULTS: The looming cognitive style of fathers, but not mothers, was significantly related to greater anxiety in adult offspring.
This finding was obtained for both sons and daughters, and remained even after statistically controlling for the anxiety, worry, depressive symptoms, and anxiety sensitivity (AS) of parents).
Notably, the association between fathers' looming cognitive style and offspring symptoms was not related to their child's depressive symptoms, and similar to prior work, served as a cognitive marker specific to anxiety.
LIMITATIONS: The present study relied on a cross-sectional design and did not use clients diagnosed with anxiety disorders.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that it may prove fruitful to consider parental vulnerabilities such as looming cognitive styles in comprehensive cognitive and interpersonal models of anxiety.
The intergenerational transmission of emotional difficulties seems to extend beyond anxiety to beliefs about the escalation of threat.

24708496

Research has indicated that individuals of Asian descent, relative to other racial groups, demonstrate reduced emotional responding and lower prevalence rates of several anxiety disorders.
It is unclear though whether these group differences extend to biomarkers of anxiety disorders and whether genetic differences play a role.
This study compared self-identified Caucasian, Latino, and Asian persons (total N = 174) on startle response during a baseline period and while anticipating unpredictable threat-a putative biomarker for certain anxiety disorders--as well as predictable threat.
In addition, the association between genetic ancestry and startle response was examined within each racial group to determine potential genetic influences on responding.
For the baseline period, Asian participants exhibited a smaller startle response relative to Caucasian and Latino participants, who did not differ.
Within each racial group, genetic ancestry was associated with baseline startle.
Furthermore, genetic ancestry mediated racial group differences in baseline startle.
For the threat conditions, a Race x Condition interaction indicated that Asian participants exhibited reduced startle potentiation to unpredictable, but not predicable, threat relative to Caucasian and Latino participants, who did not differ.
However, genetic ancestry was not associated with threat-potentiated startle in any racial group.
This study adds to the growing literature on racial differences in emotional responding and provides preliminary evidence suggesting that genetic ancestry may play an important role.
Moreover, reduced sensitivity to unpredictable threat may reflect a mechanism for why individuals of Asian descent are at less risk for particular anxiety disorders relative to other racial groups.

======================================================================
Sleep_Wakefulness
======================================================================
30944226

BACKGROUND: Hammock positioning is now frequently used with preterm infants admitted to ICUs.
However, few studies have investigated the extent to which hammock positioning reduces pain and improves the sleep-wakefulness state compared with traditional positioning.
METHODS: Twenty-six clinically stable newborns with gestational ages from 30 to 37 weeks who were breathing spontaneously were randomly assigned to 2 groups: a hammock-positioning group (n = 13), in which newborns were placed in hammocks in the lateral position, and a traditional-positioning group (n = 13), in which they were kept nested, also in the lateral position.
The following variables were evaluated at the beginning and the end of the treatment: pain (with the Premature Infant Pain Profile, and Neonatal Facial Coding System), sleep-wakefulness state (with the Brazelton Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale), heart rate, breathing frequency, and peripheral SpO2 .
RESULTS: The subjects in the hammock-positioning group showed an improvement in pain compared with the traditional-positioning group(Premature Infant Pain Profile score, 2.62 +/- 1.89 vs 2.31 +/- 1.97, DeltaP = .008) and sleep-wakefulness state score (2.08 +/- 0.64 vs 1.23 +/- 0.44, Delta P < .001), reduced heart rate (151.69 +/- 5.44 vs 142.77 +/- 5.18 beats/min, Delta P < .001), breathing frequency (52.31 +/- 4.05 vs 50.23 +/- 2.55 beats/min, Delta P = .024), and increased peripheral SpO2 (94.69 +/- 2.14 vs 98.00 +/- 1.22%, Delta P < .001).
Hammock positioning was an effective treatment option to reduce pain and improve sleep-wakefulness state.
It also helped to reduce heart rate and breathing frequency, and to increase peripheral SpO2 , which made it a treatment option for preterm infants.

28840789

The possession of a rhythm is usually described as an important adaptation to regular changing environmental conditions such as the light-dark cycle.
However, recent studies have suggested plasticity in the expression of a rhythm depending on life history and environmental factors.
Barn owl ( Tyto alba) nestlings show variations in behavior and physiology in relation to the size of black feather spots, a trait associated with many behavioral and physiological phenotypes including the circadian expression of corticosterone and the regulation of body mass.
This raises the possibility that individual spottiness could be associated with rhythmicity in sleep-wakefulness.
Owlets showed ultradian rhythms in sleep-wakefulness, with a period length of 4.5 to 4.9.
The period length of wakefulness and non-REM sleep was shorter in heavily compared to lightly spotted female nestlings, whereas in males, the opposite result was found.
Furthermore, male and female nestlings displaying small black spots showed strong rhythmicity levels in wakefulness and REM sleep.
This might be an advantage in a stable environment with predictable periodic changes in light, temperature, or social interactions.
Heavily spotted nestlings displayed weak rhythms in wakefulness and REM sleep, which might enable them to be more flexible in reactions to unexpected events such as predation or might be a mechanism to save energy.
These findings are consistent with previous findings showing that large-spotted nestlings switch more frequently between wakefulness and sleep, resulting in higher levels of vigilance compared to small-spotted conspecifics.
Thus, nestlings with larger black feather spots might differently handle the trade-off between wakefulness and sleep, attention, and social interactions compared to nestlings with smaller black spots.

28272728

Distributed neural networks in the brain sustain generation of wakefulness and two sleep states: non-REM sleep and REM sleep.
These three behavioral states are jointly ingrained in a rhythmic sequence that constitutes the sleep-wakefulness cycle.
This paper reviews and updates knowledge about the involvement of the histaminergic system in sleep-wakefulness cycle organization.
Histaminergic neurons are exclusively located in the hypothalamic tuberomammillary nucleus, but are the source of a widespread projection system to many brain regions.
Histamine neurons are active during waking, especially with high attention need, and remain silent in both non-REM and REM sleep.
There have been described four metabotropic histamine receptors, of which H1R, H2R and H3R are present in the nervous system.
H1R and H2R are mainly postsynaptic heteroreceptors, whereas H3R is thought to be mostly a presynaptic auto- and hetero-receptor.
Histaminergic neurons are excited by hypocretinergic neurons and most of the arousing hypocretin effects are thought to depend on histaminergic actions.
Interactions among histaminergic axons and cholinergic nuclei within forebrain and brainstem are particularly important for cortical activation.
In contrast, histaminergic tuberomammillary neurons, similarly to other aminergic neurons in locus coeruleus or dorsal raphe nucleus, are inhibited by non-REM sleep-promoting neurons of the preoptic region.
Further inhibitory actions on histamine neurons come from adenosine release on tuberomammillary region.
Finally, histaminergic neurons inhibit REM-on hypothalamic neurons containing melanine-concentrating hormone, thus supporting a permissive role of tuberomammillary nucleus in REM sleep.
Actually, knockout mice for histidine decarboxylase, the enzyme synthetizing histamine, show a significant REM sleep increase.

26719553

The work was aimed for the ascertainment of following question - whether Orexin-containing neurons of dorsal and lateral hypothalamus and brain Orexinergic system in general are those cellular targets which can accelerate recovery of disturbed sleep homeostasis and restoration of sleep-wakefulness cycle behavioral states from barbiturate anesthesia-induced artificial sleep.
Investigation was carried out on 18 wild type white rats (weight 200-250gr).
Different doses of Nembutal Sodium were used for the initiation of deep anesthesia.
30 min after barbiturate anesthesia induced artificial sleep serial electrical stimulations of dorsal or lateral hypothalamus were started.
Stimulation period lasted for 1 hour with the 5 min intervals between subsequent stimulations applied by turn to the left and right side hypothalamic parts.
EEG registration of cortical and hippocampal electrical activity was started 10 min after intra-peritoneal administration of Nembutal Sodium and continued continuously during 72 hour.
According to obtained new evidences, serial electrical stimulations of dorsal and lateral hypothalamic Orexin-containing neurons significantly accelerate recovery of wakefulness, sleep homeostasis, disturbed because of barbiturate anesthesia induced artificial sleep and different behavioral states of sleep-wakefulness cycle.
Hypothalamic Orexin-containing neurons can be considered as the cellular targets for regulating of sleep homeostasis through the acceleration of recovery of wakefulness, and SWC in general, from barbiturate anesthesia-induced deep sleep.

30041936

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether perinatal smoking exposure is associated with gastroesophageal reflux (GER)-related changes in sleep-wakefulness states in neonates.
STUDY DESIGN: Thirty-one neonates, referred for the investigation of suspected GER, were recruited and underwent multichannel impedance-pH monitoring and synchronized 8- to 12-hour polysomnography.
The infants' exposure to tobacco smoke was estimated by means of a urine cotinine assay.
The total number, frequency (h(-1)), and mean duration (minutes) of GER-pH (reflux events detected by the pH electrode only) and GER-imp (reflux events with bolus movement detected by impedance) events were determined.
Intergroup differences (smoking-exposed group vs nonexposed group) were probed with nonparametric, unpaired Mann-Whitney U tests.
A chi(2) test was used to assess a possible intergroup difference in bolus retrograde migration during GER-imp events.
RESULTS: According to the urine cotinine assay, 21 of the 31 neonates had been exposed to cigarette smoke during the perinatal period.
The number (and frequency) of GER-imp was significantly greater (P = .016) in the exposed group (29 [0-90]) than in the nonexposed group (12 [2-35]).
Migration of the esophageal bolus from the distal segment to the most proximal segment was significantly more frequent (P = .016) in the exposed group (83% of GER) than in the nonexposed group (41%).
The GER pattern associated with smoking exposure was particularly obvious during Rapid eye movement sleep.
CONCLUSIONS: The more frequent occurrence and greater proximal migration of GER-imp in the smoking-exposed group (especially during rapid eye movement sleep) may have clinical relevance.
Smoking exposure is a preventable risk factor for limiting the occurrence of GER in neonates.

24323968

The work was aimed for the ascertainment of following question - whether Orexin-containing neurons of dorsal and lateral hypothalamic, and brain Orexinergic system in general, are those cellular targets which can speed up recovery of disturbed sleep homeostasis and accelerate restoration of sleep-wakefulness cycle phases during some pathological conditions - experimental comatose state and/or deep anesthesia-induced sleep.
Study was carried out on white rats.
Modeling of experimental comatose state was made by midbrain cytotoxic lesions at intra-collicular level.
Animals were under artificial respiration and special care.
Different doses of Sodium Ethaminal were used for deep anesthesia.
30 min after comatose state and/or deep anesthesia induced sleep serial electrical stimulations of posterior and/or perifornical hypothalamus were started.
Stimulation period lasted for 1 hour with the 5 min intervals between subsequent stimulations applied by turn to the left and right side hypothalamic parts.EEG registration of cortical and hippocampal electrical activity was started immediately after experimental comatose state and deep anesthesia induced sleep and continued continuously during 72 hour.
According to obtained new evidences, serial electrical stimulations of posterior and perifornical hypothalamic Orexin-containing neurons significantly accelerate recovery of sleep homeostasis, disturbed because of comatose state and/or deep anesthesia induced sleep.
Speed up recovery of sleep homeostasis was manifested in acceleration of coming out from comatose state and deep anesthesia induced sleep and significant early restoration of sleep-wakefulness cycle behavioral states.

26984688

Anesthesia and surgery disturb sleep.
Disturbed sleep adversely affects postoperative complications involving the cardiovascular system, diabetes, and infection.
General anesthetics share neuronal mechanisms involving endogenous sleep-wakefulness-related substances, such as orexin (OX) and melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH).
We evaluated changes in sleep architecture and the concentration of OX and MCH during the peri-anesthetic period.
To examine sleep architecture, male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 350-450 g received ketamine 100 mg/kg (n = 9) or propofol 80 mg/kg (n = 6) by intraperitoneal injection.
Electroencephalography was recorded from 2 days pre- to 5 days postanesthesia.
To quantify levels of OX and MCH, 144 similar rats received the same doses of ketamine (n = 80) or propofol (n = 64).
Brain concentrations of these substances were determined at 0, 20, 60, and 120 min after anesthetic administration.
RESULTS: Ketamine decreased OX content in the hypothalamus during the anesthesia period.
OX content was restored to pre-anesthesia levels in the hypothalamus and pons.
Both anesthetics increased brain MCH content in the postanesthetic period, with the degree of increase being greater with propofol.
Ketamine enhanced wakefulness and inhibited non-rapid eye movement sleep (NREMS) immediately after anesthesia.
Conversely, propofol inhibited wakefulness and enhanced NREMS in that period.
Ketamine inhibited wakefulness and enhanced NREMS during the dark phase on the first postanesthesia day.
Anesthetics affect various endogenous sleep-wakefulness-related substances; however, the modulation pattern may depend on the type of anesthetic.
The process of postanesthetic sleep disturbance was agent specific.
Our results provide fundamental evidence to treat anesthetic-related sleep disturbance.

24311996

The perifornical area in the posterior lateral hypothalamus (PeFLH) has been implicated in several physiological functions including the sleep-wakefulness regulation.
The PeFLH area contains several cell types including those expressing orexins (Orx; also known as hypocretins), mainly located in the PeF nucleus.
The aim of the present study was to elucidate the synaptic interactions between Orx neurons located in the PeFLH area and different brainstem neurons involved in the generation of wakefulness and sleep stages such as the locus coeruleus (LC) nucleus (contributing to wakefulness) and the oral pontine reticular nucleus (PnO) nucleus (contributing to REM sleep).
Anatomical data demonstrated the existence of a neuronal network involving the PeFLH area, LC, and the PnO nuclei that would control the sleep-wake cycle.
Electrophysiological experiments indicated that PeFLH area had an excitatory effect on LC neurons.
PeFLH stimulation increased the firing rate of LC neurons and induced an activation of the EEG.
The excitatory effect evoked by PeFLH stimulation in LC neurons was blocked by the injection of the Orx-1 receptor antagonist SB-334867 into the LC.
Similar electrical stimulation of the PeFLH area evoked an inhibition of PnO neurons by activation of GABAergic receptors because the effect was blocked by bicuculline application into the PnO.
Our data also revealed that the LC and PnO nuclei exerted a feedback control on neuronal activity of PeFLH area.
Electrical stimulation of LC facilitated firing activity of PeFLH neurons by activation of catecholaminergic receptors whereas PnO stimulation inhibited PeFLH neurons by activation of GABAergic receptors.
In conclusion, Orx neurons of the PeFLH area seem to be an important organizer of the wakefulness and sleep stages in order to maintain a normal succession of stages during the sleep-wakefulness cycle.

27630549

AIM: Under natural conditions diurnal rhythms of biological processes of the organism are synchronized with each other and to the environmental changes by means of the circadian system.
Disturbances of the latter affect hormonal levels, sleep-wakefulness cycle and cognitive performance.
To study mechanisms of such perturbations animal models subjected to artificial photoperiods are often used.
The goal of current study was to understand the effects of circadian rhythm disruption, caused by a short light-dark cycle regime, on activity of the cerebral cortex in rodents.
METHODS: We used electroencephalogram to assess the distribution of vigilance states, perform spectral analysis, and estimate the homeostatic sleep drive.
In addition, we analyzed spontaneous locomotion of C57BL/6J mice under symmetric, 22-, 21-, and 20-h-long light-dark cycles using video recording and tracking methods.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: We found that shortening of photoperiod caused a significant increase of slow wave activity during non-rapid eye movement sleep suggesting an elevation of sleep pressure under such conditions.
While the rhythm of spontaneous locomotion was completely entrained by all light-dark cycles tested, periodic changes in the power of the theta- and gamma-frequency ranges during wakefulness gradually disappeared under 22- and 21-h-long light-dark cycles.
This was associated with a significant increase in the theta-gamma phase-amplitude coupling during wakefulness.
Our results thus provide deeper understanding of the mechanisms underlying the impairment of learning and memory retention, which is associated with disturbed circadian regulation.

30695501

The role of orexin in the organization of sleep-wakefulness cycle (SWC) is well known.
The aim of this study was to examine the terms of formation of the orexinergic system in the rat postnatal ontogenesis and to assess the role of orexin A in SWC organization under normal conditions and after prenatal hypoxia realized on days 14 and 19 of the embryogenesis.
SWC was investigated in 30-day-old rats with elect- rodes implanted into the somatosensory and occipital cortex.
Immunoreactivity in the orexinergic structures of the lateral hypothalamus was also studied.
It was shown that in the control 14-day-old animals the orexinergic structures were at the formation stage whereas in the 30-day-old ones they were already formed as in adults.
In the 14-day-old rats prenatal hypoxia evoked retardation of the orexinergic system for- mation terms.
In the 30-day-old rats the orexinergic system activity after hypoxia was increased, with hypoxia on day 19 activating this system stronger than hypoxia on day 14 of gestation.
These changes were reflected in the SWC formation in the 30-day-old rats as shortening of the slow-wave phase of sleep, increase in the fitful sleep and in the number of transitions from the slow-wave to the fast-wave phase of sleep.
The results obtained are discussed in the light of the adaptation-compensatory role of the orexinergic system in the postnatal ontogenesis after prenatal damage affecting the central neural system.

26859995

The results of study of sleep-wakefulness cycle in experimental models of pre-clinical and early clinical stages of Parkinson's disease present and compared to some clinical examples.
The conclusion is, the increase in activity level and decrease in total amount of slow wave and paradoxical sleep in model animals are taking place at the same circadian period of the secretion of pineal melatonin as sleep disorders in patients.

25570915

Several research groups have developed automated sleep-wakefulness classifiers for night wrist actigraphic (ACT) data.
These classifiers tend to be unbalanced, with a tendency to overestimate the detection of sleep, at the expense of poorer detection of wakefulness.
The reason for this is that the measure of success in previous works was the maximization of the overall accuracy, disregarding the balance between sensitivity and specificity.
The databases were usually sleep recordings, hence the over-representation of sleep samples.
In this work an Artificial Neural Network (ANN), sleep-wakefulness classifier is presented.
ACT data was collected every minute.
An 11-min moving window was used as observing frame for data analysis, as applied in previous sleep ACT studies.
However, our feature set adds new variables such as the time of the day, the median and the median absolute deviation.
Sleep and Wakefulness data were balanced to improve the system training.
A comparison with previous studies can still be done, by choosing the point in the ROC curve associated with the corresponding data balance.
Our results are compared with a polysomnogram-based hypnogram as golden standard, rendering an accuracy of 92.8%, a sensitivity of 97.6% and a specificity of 73.4%.
Geometric mean between sensitivity and specificity is 84.9%.

25323301

The interaction of age with shift rotation in relation to sleep-wakefulness and inflammation were studied among male employees (n = 772).
Cross-sectional analyses in day, two-shift and three-shift work with different shift rotations, as well as changes in leukocytes and hsCRP among three shift workers who changed their shift system during the 2.5- yr follow-up were completed.
Shift work was associated with problems to fall asleep (p < 0.001) and feeling of the current working time being harmful to sleep and wakefulness (p < 0.001).
Quickly forward-rotation shift workers considered their working time less harmful compared with slower backward-rotation shift workers.
Age did not influence sleep in general, but older workers in the quickly forward-rotating three-shift system had less sleep complaints than their younger colleagues.
The age differences in the inflammatory markers partly depended on the shift system.
The results give some support that rapidly forward-rotating shift systems are more 'age-friendly' than backward-rotating shift systems.

20621165

The alcohol-preferring (P) rat is a valid animal model of alcoholism.
However, the effect of alcohol on sleep in P or alcohol non-preferring (NP) rats is unknown.
Since alcohol consumption has tremendous impact on sleep, the present study compared the effects of binge alcohol administration on sleep-wakefulness in P and NP rats.
Using standard surgical procedures, the P and NP rats were bilaterally implanted with sleep recording electrodes.
Following post-operative recovery and habituation, pre-ethanol (baseline) sleep-wakefulness was electrographically recorded for 48.
Subsequently, ethanol was administered beginning with a priming dose of 5 g/Kg followed by two doses of 2 g/Kg every 8 h on the first day and three doses of 3 g/Kg/8 h on the second day.
On the following day (post-ethanol), undisturbed sleep-wakefulness was electrographically recorded for 24.
Our initial results suggest that, during baseline conditions, the time spent in each of the three behavioral states: wakefulness, non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep and REM sleep, was comparable between P and NP rats.
However, the P rats were more susceptible to changes in sleep-wakefulness following 2 days of binge ethanol treatment.
As compared to NP rats, the P rats displayed insomnia like symptoms including a significant reduction in the amount of time spent in NREM sleep coupled with a significant increase in wakefulness on post-ethanol day.
Subsequent analysis revealed that binge ethanol induced increased wakefulness and reduced NREM sleep in P rats occurred mainly in the dark period.
This is the first study that: (1) demonstrates spontaneous sleep-wake profile in P and NP rats, and (2) compares the effects of binge ethanol treatment on sleep in P and NP rats.
Our results suggest that, as compared to NP rats, the P rats were more susceptible to sleep disruptions after binge ethanol treatment.
In addition, the P rats exhibited insomnia-like symptoms observed during abstinence from alcohol in human subjects.

19721817

Hypocretins or orexins (Hcrt/Orx) are hypothalamic neuropeptides that are synthesized by neurons located mainly in the perifornical area of the posterolateral hypothalamus.
These hypothalamic neurons are the origin of an extensive and divergent projection system innervating numerous structures of the central nervous system.
In recent years it has become clear that these neuropeptides are involved in the regulation of many organic functions, such as feeding, thermoregulation and neuroendocrine and cardiovascular control, as well as in the control of the sleep-wakefulness cycle.
In this respect, Hcrt/Orx activate two subtypes of G protein-coupled receptors (Hcrt/Orx1R and Hcrt/Orx2R) that show a partly segregated and prominent distribution in neural structures involved in sleep-wakefulness regulation.
Wakefulness-enhancing and/or sleep-suppressing actions of Hcrt/Orx have been reported in specific areas of the brainstem.
Moreover, presently there are animal models of human narcolepsy consisting in modifications of Hcrt/Orx receptors or absence of these peptides.
This strongly suggests that narcolepsy is the direct consequence of a hypofunction of the Hcrt/Orx system, which is most likely due to Hcrt/Orx neurons degeneration.The main focus of this review is to update and illustrate the available data on the actions of Hcrt/Orx neuropeptides with special interest in their participation in the control of the sleep-wakefulness cycle and the regulation of energy homeostasis.
Current pharmacological treatment of narcolepsy is also discussed.

23401913

Data about behavioral, somato-vegetative and neurophysiological parameters of sleep and wakefulness in insects, cold- and warm-blooded vertebrates are provided.
Hypotheses existing now about evolutionary formation of separate sleep phases and stages in vertebrates are considered.
In the review are shown the data about correlations of quantitative characteristics of sleep and wake in some mammals with basic metabolic rate, lifestyle, environmental habits.
The original experimental results at formation of neurophysiological characteristics of sleep and wake in vertebrates, phylogeny and in ontogeny of mature and immature mammals are provided in detail.
On the basis of own concepts about evolutionary development of sleep-wakefulness cycle in vertebrates the interactions of telencephalic, diencephalic and rhombencepalic parts of brain in the processes of cycle wakefulness cycle integration are discussed.

19931991

BACKGROUND: Infants exposed to opioides in-utero frequently demonstrate withdrawal symptoms in the neonatal period and have difficulties with state regulation.
AIM: This study examines sleep-wakefulness-distress patterns as indicators of regulatory mechanisms at 3 months of age.
PARTICIPANTS: A national infant cohort (N=35) born to women in high-dose maintenance treatment during pregnancy and a comparison group (N=36) of low-risk infants born in the same period.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Distributions and frequencies of sleep, wakefulness and distress measured in hours and episodes on sleep charts recorded by the mothers in the two groups.
RESULTS: Women in maintenance treatment were monitored closely during pregnancy to avoid illicit drug use and to be prepared for motherhood.
They were also offered residential treatment before pregnancy and after the child was born.
There were no statistical differences between the two groups in any of the 10 measures reflecting diurnal and nocturnal rhythmicity at 3 months despite of neonatal abstinence syndrome in 47% of the exposed infants and significant differences in infant characteristics with respect to birth weight, gestational age and maternal characteristics.
CONCLUSIONS: Follow-up procedures combining drug monitoring and counseling during pregnancy and in the first months after birth enhance the development of state regulation in terms of sleep-wakefulness patterns.

29304108

Behavioral states alternate between wakefulness (wk), rapid eye movement (rem) and non-rem (nrem) sleep at time scale of hours i.e., light and dark cycle rhythms and from several tens of minutes to seconds (i.e., brief awakenings during sleep).
Using statistical analysis of bout duration, Markov chains of sleep-wk dynamics and quantitative EEG analysis, we evaluated the influence of light/dark (ld) changes on brain function along the sleep-wk cycle.
Bout duration (bd) histograms and Kaplan-Meier (km) survival curves of wk showed a bimodal statistical distribution, suggesting that two types of wk do exist: brief-wk (wkb) and long-wk (wkl).
Light changes modulated specifically wkl bouts, increasing its duration during active/dark period.
In contrast, wkb, nrem and rem bd histograms and km curves did not change significantly along ld cycle.
Hippocampal eeg of both types of wk were different: in comparison wkb showed a lower spectral power in fast gamma and fast theta bands and less emg tone.
After fitting a four-states Markov chain to mice hypnograms, moreover in states transition probabilities matrix was found that: in dark/active period, state-maintenance probability of wkl increased, and probability of wkl to nrem transition decreased; the opposite was found in light period, favoring the hypothesis of the participation of brief wk into nrem-rem intrinsic sleep cycle, and the role of wkl in SWS homeostasis.
In conclusion, we propose an extended Markov model of sleep using four stages (wkl, nrem, rem, wkb) as a fully adequate model accounting for both modulation of sleep-wake dynamics based on the differential regulation of long-wk (high gamma/theta) epochs during dark and light phases.

21308795

The Hypocretin1/OrexinA (Hcrt1/OxA) neuropeptides are found in a group of posterolateral hypothalamus neurons and are involved in sleep-wakefulness cycle regulation.
Hcrt1/OxA neurons project widely to brainstem aminergic structures, such as the locus coeruleus (LC), which are involved in maintenance of wakefulness and EEG activation through intense projections to the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC).
Moreover, defects of the Hcrt1/OxA system are linked to narcolepsy, a disorder characterized by excessive diurnal hypersomnia and REM state disturbance.
We aimed to determine whether Hcrt1/OxA neurons innervate LC neurons (noradrenergic and nonnoradrenergic) that project to the mPFC, thereby sustaining behavioral wakefulness.
To assess this, we used retrograde tracing from mPFC injections and either Hcrt1/OxA or tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunohistochemical labeling in single sections of rat LC.
The retrograde tracer Fluorogold (FG) was microinjected into mPFC and, at optimal survival periods, sections through the LC were processed for dual immunolabeling of anti-FG and either anti-Hcrt1/OxA or anti-TH antisera.
Many LC neurons projecting to mPFC were nonnoradrenergic.
Electron microscopy revealed a prominent localization of Hcrt1/OxA in unmyelinated axons and axon boutons (varicosities and axon terminals) within the LC.
Hcrt1/OxA-immunoreactive axon boutons frequently apposed (104/1907) or made asymmetric excitatory-type synapses (60/1907) with FG-immunolabeled dendrites, indicating that Hcrt1/OxA can modulate the activity of LC neurons with cortical projections.
Our results show that Hcrt1/OxA hypothalamic neurons likely excite LC neurons that project to the mPFC, and thus activate EEG and facilitate wakefulness.
In narcoleptics, who are deficient in Hcrt1/OxA, impairment of this Hcrt1/OxA hypothalamic input to LC might contribute to the appearance of excessive daytime sleepiness.

18953995

The aim of our study was to investigate the role of dopaminergic system in telencephalic and diencephalic brain regions of vertebrates in sleep-wakefulness cycle.
The level of thyrosine-hydroxylase--the main enzyme in dopamine synthesis--was measured in striatum, zona inserta supraoptic and arcuate nuclea of hypothalamus in fish (Acipenceridae) and in mammals (rats) in ontogenesis (14-, 30-day old rats and adult animals) under tactile and sleep deprivation stresses.
The thyrosine-hydroxylase-immunoreactive cells were revealed in all brain regions of fishes after a short-term stress.
In the group after longtime stress, the thyrosine-hydroxylase-immunoreactive cells and fibers were almost absent in anterior brain but were found in hypothalamic nuclea.
At 14-day old rats, 2-hour sleep deprivation caused increasing of thyrosine-hydroxylase-immunoreactivity both in fibers of caudate nucleus as well as in cells of the zona inserta.
A 6-hour deprivation caused increasing of thyrosine-hydroxylase-immunoreactive material level in cells of zona inserta and decreasing it in fibers of 30-day old rats.
In adult rats, the level of thyrosine-hydroxylase-immunoreactive material decreased in nucleus arcuatus and zona inserta after sleep deprivation and increased after sleep.
Data obtained are discussed in terms ofphylo- and ontogenetic development of neurosecretory and neurotransmitter functions of dopaminergic system in evolutionary old diencephalic and evolutionary young telencephalic brain regions of vertebrates, which are the important systems of starting and maintenance of some functional conditions of the organism in sleep-wakefulness cycle.

18406065

Gaboxadol or 4,5,6,7-tetrahydroisoxazolo-[5,4-c]pyridine-3-ol (THIP) is a selective agonist for the delta-subunit containing extrasynaptic GABA(A) receptors that will soon enter the U.S. market as a sleep aid [Winsky-Sommerer R, Vyazovskiy VV, Homanics GE, Tobler I (2007) The EEG effects of THIP (gaboxadol) on sleep and waking are mediated by the GABA(A)delta-subunit-containing receptors Eur J Neurosci 25:1893-1899].
Numerous studies have shown that systemic administration of THIP reduces wakefulness and increases sleep both in humans and rats [Lancel M, Langebartels A (2000) Gamma-aminobutyric acid(A) (GABA(A)) agonist 4,5,6,7-tetrahydroisoxazolo[4,5-c]pyridin-3-ol persistently increases sleep maintenance and intensity during chronic administration to rats.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 293:1084-1090; Walsh JK, Deacon S, Dijk DJ, Lundahl J (2007) The selective extrasynaptic GABAA agonist, gaboxadol, improves traditional hypnotic efficacy measures and enhances slow wave activity in a model of transient insomnia Sleep 30:593-602].
However, it is yet unclear where in the brain THIP acts to promote sleep.
Since the perifornical lateral hypothalamus (PFH) contains orexin neurons and orexin neurons are critical for maintenance of arousal [McCarley RW (2007) Neurobiology of rapid eye movement (REM) and NREM sleep Sleep Med 8:302-330], we hypothesized that THIP may act on PFH neurons to promote sleep.
To test our hypothesis, we used reverse microdialysis to perfuse THIP unilaterally into the PFH and studied its effects on sleep-wakefulness during the light period in freely behaving rats.
Microdialysis perfusion of THIP (100 microM) into the PFH produced a significant reduction in wakefulness with a concomitant increase in non-rapid eye movement or slow wave sleep as compared with artificial cerebrospinal fluid perfusion.
REM sleep was unaffected.
This is the first study implicating the delta-subunit containing extrasynaptic GABA(A) receptors in PFH in control of sleep-wakefulness in freely behaving rats.

27769744

Pannexins are membrane channel proteins that play a role in a number of critical biological processes (Panchin et al., 2000; Shestopalov, Panchin, 2008).
Among other cellular functions, pannexin hemichannels serve as purine nucleoside conduits providing ATP efflux into the extracellular space (Dahl, 2015), where it is rapidly degraded to adenosine.
Pannexin1 (Panx1) is abundantly expressed in the brain and has been shown to contribute to adenosine signaling in nervous system tissues (Prochnow et al., 2012).
We hypothesized that pannexin1 may contribute to sleep-wake cycle regulation through extracellular adenosine, a well-established paracrine factor in slow wave sleep.
To investigate this link, EEG and movement activity throughout the light/dark cycle were compared in Panx1(-/-) and Panx1(+/+) mice.
We found a significant increase in waking and a correspondent decrease in slow wave sleep percentages in the Panx1(-/-) animals.
These changes were especially pronounced during the dark period.
Furthermore, we found a significant increase in movement activity of Panx1(-/-) mice.
These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that extracellular adenosine is relatively depleted in Panx1(-/-) animals due to the absence of the ATP-permeable hemichannels.
At the same time, sleep rebound after a 6-h sleep deprivation remained unchanged in Panx1(-/-) mice as compared to the control animals.
Behavioral tests revealed that Panx1(-/-) mice were significantly faster during their descent along the vertical pole but more sluggish during their run through the horizontal pole as compared to the control mice.

18440150

The orexinergic neurons of the lateral hypothalamus (LH) are critical for wakefulness [McCarley RW (2007) Neurobiology of REM and NREM sleep Sleep Med 8:302-330].
Recent evidence suggests that adenosine (AD), a homeostatic sleep factor, may act via A1 receptor (A1R) to control orexinergic activity and regulate sleep-wakefulness [Thakkar MM, Winston S, McCarley RW (2002) Orexin neurons of the hypothalamus express adenosine A1 receptors.
Brain Res 944:190-194; Liu ZW, Gao XB (2006) Adenosine inhibits activity of hypocretin/orexin neurons via A1 receptor in the lateral hypothalamus: a possible sleep-promoting effect J Neurophysiol].
To evaluate the role of AD in the orexinergic LH and its influences on sleep-wakefulness, we designed two experiments in freely behaving rats.
First, we bilaterally microinjected 1,3-dipropyl-8-phenylxanthine (DPX) (1.5 pmol and 15 pmol), a selective A1R antagonist into the LH during the light cycle and examined its effect on spontaneous sleep-wakefulness.
Second, we performed 6 h of sleep deprivation.
Thirty minutes before the animals were allowed to enter recovery sleep, 15 pmol of DPX was bilaterally microinjected into the LH and its effects on recovery sleep were monitored.
Microinjection of DPX into the orexinergic LH produced a significant increase in wakefulness with a concomitant reduction in sleep, both during spontaneous bouts of sleep-wakefulness and during recovery sleep.
Local administration of DPX into the LH produced a significant increase in the latency to non-REM sleep during recovery sleep.
However, total slow wave (delta) activity during non-REM sleep phase of recovery sleep remained unaffected after DPX treatment.
This is the first study that implicates endogenous adenosine to have a functional role in controlling orexinergic tone and influencing the homeostatic regulation of sleep-wakefulness.

25416225

The purpose of the present work was to study the effects of tolerance to ethanol on the sleep-wakefulness cycle (SWC) structure.
Experiments were carried out in chronic conditions on the adult cats (n=5).
The following methods were used: the stereotaxic - for implanting electrodes; polysomnographic - for EEG registration of the SWC structure.
Alcoholisation (0.2-2.5 g/kg 25% ethanol solution) was conducted by intraperitoneal injections that lasted for two weeks.
The obtained results were processed statistically and significance of the changes was determined by the Student t-test.
Low single doses of ethanol (0.2 - 0.5 g/kg) did not induce any significant changes in the structure of the SWC.
While using doses of 0.6 g/kg it was noted only increasing of the latent period of the onset of sleep.
However, the structure of the SWC recovered within 1-2 hours after injection.
Increasing the dose to 1 g/kg caused severe intoxication.
This was reflected in a behavioral (anxiety, tremor, vocalizations) and autonomic (vomiting and frequent urination) signs.
Against the background of restless behavioral wakefulness synchronization of the characteristic of light slow-wave sleep developed.
The volume of deep slow-wave sleep was statistically significantly decreased and the latent period of the onset of paradoxical sleep was increased.
The structure of sleep was fragmented, due to frequent awakenings.
For the fifth-eighth day of alcoholization the structure of the SWC restored, behavioral and vegetative signs of intoxication disappeared, which must indicate the development of tolerance to this dose of ethanol.
The obtained results signify that development of tolerance to ethanol can be reflected in the alteration of the structure of SWC.
Alcoholization disturbs the subtle mechanisms of the sleep due to destruction of brain homeostasis.

21166301

Sleep is a necessary, diverse, periodic, and an active condition circadian and homeostatically regulated and precisely meshed with waking time into the sleep-wakefulness cycle (SWC).
Photic retinal stimulation modulates the suprachiasmatic nucleus, which acts as the pacemaker for SWC rhythmicity.
Both the light period and social cues adjust the internal clock, making the SWC a circadian, 24-h period in the adult human.
Bioelectrical and behavioral parameters characterize the different phases of the SWC.
For a long time, lesions and electrical stimulation of brain structures, as well as connection studies, were the main methods used to decipher the foundations of the functional anatomy of the SWC.
That is why the first section of this review presents these early historical studies to then discuss the current state of our knowledge based on our understanding of the functional anatomy of the structures underlying the SWC.
Supported by this description, we then present a detailed review and update of the structures involved in the phase of wakefulness (W), including their morphological, functional, and chemical characteristics, as well as their anatomical connections.
The structures for W generation are known as the "ascending reticular activating system", and they keep and maintain the "thalamo-cerebral cortex unit" awake.
This system originates from the neuronal groups located within the brainstem, hypothalamus, and basal forebrain, which use known neurotransmitters and whose neurons are more active during W than during the other SWC states.
Thus, synergies among several of these neurotransmitters are necessary to generate the cortical and thalamic activation that is characteristic of the W state, with all the plastic qualities and nuances present in its different behavioral circumstances.
Each one of the neurotransmitters exerts powerful influences on the information and cognitive processes as well as attentional, emotional, motivational, behavioral, and arousal states.
The awake "thalamo-cerebral cortex unit" controls and adjusts the activation pattern through a top-down action on the subcortical cellular groups that are the origin of the "ascending reticular activating system".

17948215

INTRODUCTION: The hypocretins/orexins are neuropeptides synthesized by a small neuronal cell group located in the posterior and lateral hypothalamus.
These peptides have been considered modulators of the sleep-wakefulness cycle since their discovery in 1998; the hypocretinergic/orexinergic system is very active during wakefulness.
In addition, the absence of either these peptides or their receptors is associated to narcolepsy-cataplexy, a disease in which the sleep-wakefulness cycle is completely disorganized.
DEVELOPMENT: Hypocretinergic/orexinergic neurons directly activate the cerebral cortex and neuronal cell groups of the reticular activating system containing noradrenaline, serotonin, dopamine, acetylcholine and histamine, through which they may also indirectly activate the cerebral cortex and enhance wakefulness; as well, these neurons inhibit REM sleep generation in the ventral pontine tegmentum.
The decrease in the activity of hypocretinergic/orexinergic neurons during sleep inhibits the aminergic and cholinergic neurons of the reticular activating core, decreasing cortical activation and renewing REM sleep generation in the ventral pontine tegmentum.
CONCLUSIONS: Hypocretins/orexins modulate wakefulness and EEG activation in part through their actions on reticular core neurons projecting to the cortex and suppress REM sleep generation through inhibition of ventral pontine tegmentum neurons within the ventral oral pontine tegmentum.
The hypoactivity of this system supports the sleep cycle fragmentation and general disorganization appearing in narcolepsy, as well as momentary interruption of wakefulness by REM sleep episodes.

24550770

Orexins (also known as hypocretins) play critical roles in the regulation of sleep/wakefulness states by activating two G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs), orexin 1 (OX1R) and orexin 2 receptors (OX2R).
In order to understand the differential contribution of both receptors in regulating sleep/wakefulness states we compared the pharmacological effects of a newly developed OX2R antagonist (2-SORA), Compound 1 m (C1 m), with those of a dual orexin receptor antagonist (DORA), suvorexant, in C57BL/6J mice.
After oral administration in the dark period, both C1m and suvorexant decreased wakefulness time with similar efficacy in a dose-dependent manner.
While C1m primarily increased total non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep time without affecting episode durations and with minimal effects on REM sleep, suvorexant increased both total NREM and REM sleep time and episode durations with predominant effects on REM sleep.
Fos-immunostaining showed that both compounds affected the activities of arousal-related neurons with different patterns.
The number of Fos-IR noradrenergic neurons in the locus coeruleus was lower in the suvorexant group as compared with the control and C1m-treated groups.
In contrast, the numbers of Fos-IR neurons in histaminergic neurons in the tuberomamillary nucleus and serotonergic neurons in the dorsal raphe were reduced to a similar extent in the suvorexant and C1m groups as compared with the vehicle-treated group.
Together, these results suggest that an orexin-mediated suppression of REM sleep via potential activation of OX1Rs in the locus coeruleus may possibly contribute to the differential effects on sleep/wakefulness exerted by a DORA as compared to a 2-SORA.

20334466

Tricyclic antidepressants decrease rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and may suppress sleep atonia.
Reports indicate that these agents can induce visual hallucinations, sometimes characterized as hypnopompic or associated with a dissociated sleep-wakefulness state.
In addition, disturbing dreams and confusional states were reported during clinical trials and in subsequent studies.
To our knowledge, only two cases of nightmares associated with mirtazapine, a tetracyclic antidepressant, have been previously reported.
We describe a 43-year-old Caucasian man with major depressive disorder who started mirtazapine 15 mg at bedtime because he had poor symptom control with other antidepressant drugs.
Three days later, vivid dream activity was noted, evolving into realistic nightmares that the patient was not able to distinguish from reality on awakening.
Acute paranoia was suspected, and haloperidol was started.
The dream activity then ended, and within 3 days the patient was able to identify the dreams as unreality.
Haloperidol was discontinued, but mirtazapine was continued, and the vivid dream activity persisted; however, reality testing when awake was intact.
A short course of haloperidol restored the patient's reality testing, and mirtazapine was eventually replaced with bupropion.
The unusual nocturnal activity resolved as a result.
Clinicians should be aware of the possible transition from exceptionally vivid dreams to REM sleep behavior disorder and psychosis based on dream content as an adverse effect of mirtazapine.

26434098

Optogenetics is a recently developed experimental technique to control the activity of neurons using light.
Optogenetics shows its power to reveal the physiological role of specific neural circuits in the brain.
In particular, manipulation of a specific type of neurons using optogenetics with high accuracy timing enables us to analyze causality between neural activity and initiation of animal behaviors.
However, to manipulate the activity of specific neurons in vivo, there are two critical steps to succeed in manipulation of the neural activity and control of the behavior of individual animals.
The first step is an adequate number of molecules of light-activated protein that has to be expressed in the cell membrane of the neurons of interest.
The second step is the optical system to illuminate the targeted neurons with enough intensity of light to activate the light-activated protein.
We applied optogenetics to hypothalamic peptidergic neurons such as orexin/hypocretin neurons or melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) neurons.
These neurons are implicated in sleep/wakefulness regulation.
In this mini review, I will show the regulatory mechanism of sleep/wakefulness by these neurons using optogenetics.

23158520

The state of sleep/wakefulness is well known to influence esophageal acid exposure and the number of acid refluxes whereas it is uncertain whether the same is true of the non-acid refluxes that predominate in the newborns.
To investigate the relationship between sleep/wakefulness and refluxes 45 newborns with gastroesophageal reflux symptoms were studied with combined multichannel intraluminal impedance and pH monitoring.
We found that sleep/wakefulness influenced acid and weakly acidic reflux frequency (awake 2.6+/-0.8; asleep 2.1+/-1.1; p=0.006).
A negative correlation was found between sleepness periods and the mean reflux duration for both acid (R=0.55;p < 0.001) and weackly acidic (R=0.51;p < 0.001) refluxes.
This finding may raise some concerns about the over-prescription of antacid drugs in newborns.

30239405

BACKGROUND: Peak sound levels during sleep can compromise the development of hospitalized infants.
Quiet time is a strategy implemented in neonatal units to promote the sleeping of neonates by reducing noise levels, luminosity, and handling during particular periods of the day.
PURPOSE: To determine the impact of quiet time on reducing sound levels and increasing total sleep time.
METHODS: This longitudinal study was conducted at a neonatal intermediate care unit with a convenience sample of 12 premature infants.
Four times per day, 60-minute quiet times were provided in the neonatal unit.
Sleep-awake states and sound levels were evaluated during quiet times as well as 60 minutes before and afterward.
Polysomnography was used for sleep-awake state assessment, and a noise dosimeter was used to check sound levels every 24 hours.
RESULTS: The preterm infants had a corrected gestational age of 35.0 +/- 1.5 weeks and weighed 1606.0 +/- 317.8.
Total sleep time was highest during quiet time (P = .005).
Premature infants remained awake for longer following quiet times (P = .005).
There was also a reduction in sound level during quiet times compared with the other time frames (P = .006).
No statistically significant relationship was found between total sleep time and sound levels more than 24 hours.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Quiet time is a nursing intervention that should be implemented in all neonatal units.
IMPLICATIONS FOR RESEARCH: Future research should use a greater sample size and other factors that influence sleep should be further investigated.

25509168

The structure, morphological and neurochemical bindings ofhistaminergic system of the brain as one of the most important mechanisms of waking maintenance, are regarded.
The biochemistry of histamine turnover and histamine receptors are briefly described.
The special role of the relation between histamine and orexin/hypocretin systems is stressed.
Some examples of the responses on wakefulness-sleep cycle of the effects of experimental manipulations with the histaminergic system are given.

18702704

Hypocretinergic/orexinergic neurons, which are known to be implicated in narcolepsy, project to the pontine tegmentum areas involved in the control of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep.
Here, we report the effects on sleep-wakefulness produced by low-volume microinjections of hypocretin (Hcrt)1 (20-30 nL, 100, 500 and 1000 microm) and carbachol (20-30 nL, 0.1 m) delivered in two areas of the oral pontine tegmentum of free-moving cats with electrodes for chronic sleep recordings: in the dorsal oral pontine tegmentum (DOPT) and in the ventral part of the oral pontine reticular nucleus (vRPO).
Carbachol in the DOPT produced dissociate polygraphic states, with some but not all REM sleep signs.
In contrast, carbachol in the vRPO produced a shift with short latency from wakefulness (W) to REM sleep with all of its polygraphic and behavioral signs.
Hcrt-1 in the DOPT increased W and decreased both slow-wave sleep (SWS) and REM sleep during the first 3 h post-drug.
The same doses of Hcr-1 in the vRPO produced a significant suppression of REM sleep without a definitive trend for changes in the other states.
Both groups showed significant decreases in the number of transitions from SWS to REM sleep.
Thus, Hcrt-1 produced distinct effects in cholinoceptive areas of the oral pontine tegmentum; in the DOPT it promoted W, suppressed SWS and probably defacilitated REM sleep, and in the vRPO it directly inhibited REM sleep.
Hypocretinergic/orexinergic signaling is lost in narcoleptics and this absence would mean that pontine defacilitation/inhibition of REM sleep would also be absent, explaining why these patients can fall directly into REM sleep from W.

23730297

Orexin A and orexin B are hypothalamic neuropeptides that play critical roles in the regulation of sleep/wakefulness, as well as in a variety of physiological functions such as emotion, reward, and energy homeostasis.
The actions of orexins are mediated by two receptors, orexin 1 (OX1R) and orexin 2 (OX2R) receptors.
OX1R and OX2R show partly overlapping but distinct distributions throughout the central nervous system, suggesting their differential roles.
This review presents and discusses the current knowledge concerning the physiological roles of each orexin receptor subtype, focusing on the regulation of sleep/wakefulness.

23508038

The hypothalamus monitors body homeostasis and regulates various behaviors such as feeding, thermogenesis, and sleeping.
Orexins (also known as hypocretins) were identified as endogenous ligands for two orphan G-protein-coupled receptors in the lateral hypothalamic area.
They were initially recognized as regulators of feeding behavior, but they are mainly regarded as key modulators of the sleep/wakefulness cycle.
Orexins activate orexin neurons, monoaminergic and cholinergic neurons in the hypothalamus/brainstem regions, to maintain a long, consolidated awake period.
Anatomical studies of neural projections from/to orexin neurons and phenotypic characterization of transgenic mice revealed various roles for orexin neurons in the coordination of emotion, energy homeostasis, reward system, and arousal.
For example, orexin neurons are regulated by peripheral metabolic cues, including ghrelin, leptin, and glucose concentration.
This suggests that they may provide a link between energy homeostasis and arousal states.
A link between the limbic system and orexin neurons might be important for increasing vigilance during emotional stimuli.
Orexins are also involved in reward systems and the mechanisms of drug addiction.
These findings suggest that orexin neurons sense the outer and inner environment of the body and maintain the proper wakefulness level of animals for survival.
This review discusses the mechanism by which orexins maintain sleep/wakefulness states and how this mechanism relates to other systems that regulate emotion, reward, and energy homeostasis.

23052595

Seizures can evolve sequentially into different clinical phases.
For example, a seizure may start as an aura (first phase), then evolve into a tonic seizure (second phase), and evolve further into a generalized tonic-clonic semiology (third phase).
It is currently unknown whether specific seizure evolutions cluster at particular times of the day and/or during sleep/wakefulness.
We aimed to describe the distribution of the clinical evolution of seizures across time of day and sleep/wake state.
We included all patients with at least two seizure phases admitted for long-term electroencephalogram monitoring during a 5 year period.
Two-hundred-and-fifteen patients (866 seizures) presented with two different phases and 87 patients (324 seizures) evolved into a third clinical phase.
During phase two, evolution into clonic seizures differed across time (p = 0.047) with peaks at 0-3 h and 6-9 h and during sleep (p < 0.001), evolution into automotor seizures peaked during wakefulness (p = 0.015), evolution into tonic seizures differed across time (p = 0.005) with peaks at 21-12 h and during sleep (p = 0.0119), and generalized tonic-clonic seizures peaked during sleep (p = 0.0067).
Findings remained statistically significant after multivariable analysis adjusting, separately, for potential confounders (semiology of the first phase, age, gender, days in the long-term electroencephalographic monitoring unit, abnormal neuroimaging, number of antiepileptic medications, and seizure localization).
During phase three, seizure evolutions followed the same pattern of distribution as during phase two but differences did not reach statistical significance.
Our data demonstrate that the evolution of seizures into different phases cluster at specific times of day and at specific phases of the sleep/wakefulness cycle.

17988749

Novel findings on the effects of inflammatory molecules on neuronal circuits, and on molecular interactions between immunity and sleep, in health and disease, shed light on the pathogenesis of disorders of past (encephalitis lethargica) and present concern (human African trypanosomiasis and narcolepsy), which share alterations in sleep-wakefulness transitions.
Although these three disorders differ in etiology, synaptic interactions with immune-response-derived molecules could play a pathogenetic role.
Knowledge obtained on neural-immune interplay during senescence also has implications for age-related sleep dysregulation, which is common in the elderly population.
Altogether, the data indicate that cell groups implicated in the regulation of sleep and wakefulness, circadian timing, and their interactions could be sensitive to synaptic effects of immune molecules.

18221690

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: The incidence of cardiovascular events is related to the sleep-wakefulness cycle.
In particular, the magnitude and speed of the changes in hemodynamic variables that occur during transitions between wakefulness and sleep and between sleep and wakefulness are regarded as factors that either predict or determine target organ damage and cardiovascular risk.
Although increased arterial stiffness (AS) is associated with the development of cardiovascular abnormalities, it is not known whether there exist any changes in AS that are associated with circadian variations in the incidence of cardiovascular events.
The aims of this study were to assess AS in healthy subjects over a 24-hour period, to characterize any differences that occur between sleep and wakefulness, and to investigate any changes in AS that occur during the transition from wakefulness to sleep or from sleep to wakefulness.
METHODS: Twenty healthy volunteers with a dipper circadian blood pressure pattern underwent 24-hour ambulatory monitoring of blood pressure, heart rate and AS.
In practice, AS was determined using the aorta-brachial pulse transit time and fractional pulsatility indices.
Myocardial oxygen consumption was quantified using the double product (DP).
An average was calculated for all variables for periods of sleep (23:00 to 06:00) and wakefulness (8:00 to 21:00) and for transitions from wakefulness to sleep (20:00 vs. 02:00) and from sleep to wakefulness (06:00 vs. 10:00 hours).
RESULTS: In complete contrast to DP, AS was greater during sleep than wakefulness (P< .05).
Moreover, the changes in AS that occurred during transitions from wakefulness to sleep and from sleep to wakefulness were the opposite of those observed in DP (P< .05).
CONCLUSIONS: Arterial stiffness was greater during sleep than wakefulness, increased during the transition from wakefulness to sleep, and decreased during the transition from sleep to wakefulness.

22647470

Several neuropeptides, including galanin, orexin, melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), urocortin-2, pituitary adenylate cyclase activating protein, and vasoactive intestinal peptide, have been implicated in the regulation of sleep/wakefulness states.
In particular, neuropeptides produced in the hypothalamus, including galanin, orexin, and MCH, have been shown to play crucial roles.
Galanin is localized to the prepotic area of the hypothalamus and is likely to be involved in the promotion and maintenance of sleep.
MCH, which is expressed by neurons in the lateral hypothalamic area (LHA), seems to be implicated in rapid eye movement sleep regulation.
Orexins are also localized in the LHA and have been established as one of the most important factors in the regulation of sleep/wakefulness states.
A series of studies have suggested that orexin deficiency causes narcolepsy in humans and other mammalian species, highlighting the roles of this hypothalamic neuropeptide in the regulation of sleep and wakefulness.
Studies of efferent and afferent systems of orexin-producing neurons have shown that the orexin neuronal system has close interactions with the systems that regulate emotion, energy homeostasis, reward, and arousal.
These observations suggest that orexin neurons are involved in sensing the body's external and internal environments and regulate vigilance states accordingly.

22612581

Fluctuations in sleep/wake state have been proposed as an important mechanism contributing to the development of oscillatory breathing patterns, including Cheyne-Stokes respiration in patients with heart failure.
In order to properly assess the interactions between changes in state and changes in ventilatory parameters, a methodology capable of continuously and reliably detecting state transitions is needed.
Traditional fixed-epoch analysis of polysomnographic recordings is not suitable for this purpose.
Moreover, visual identification of changes in the dominant electroencephalogram activity at the transition from wakefulness to sleep and vice versa is often very subjective.
We have therefore developed a hybrid approach--including both visual scoring and computer-based procedures--for continuous analysis of state transitions from polysomnographic recordings, specifically tailored for fluctuations between wakefulness and non-rapid eye movement-1 and -2 sleep.
The overall analysis process comprises three major phases: (1) manual identification of relevant electroencephalogram/electrooculogram features and events, including a sample of unequivocal alpha and theta-delta activity; (2) automatic statistical discrimination of dominant electroencephalogram activity; and (3) state classification (wakefulness, non-rapid eye movement-1 and -2).
The latter is carried out by merging information from visual scoring with the output of the discriminator.
Validation has been carried out in 16 patients with heart failure during daytime Cheyne-Stokes respiration, using a training and testing set of electroencephalogram polysomnograms.
The statistical discriminator correctly classified 99.1 +/- 1.4% and 99.2 +/- 1.1% of unequivocal alpha and theta-delta activity.
This approach has therefore the potential to be used to reliably measure the incidence and location of sleep-wake transitions during abnormal breathing patterns, as well as their temporal relationship with major ventilatory events.

21950094

Brief anatomical, physiological and neurochemical basics of the regulation of wakefulness, slow wave (NREM) sleep and paradoxical (REM) sleep are regarded as representing by the end of the first decade of the second millennium.

15961331

The finding of orexin (hypocretin) deficiency in patients with narcolepsy suggests that this hypothalamic neuropeptide plays a crucial role in regulating and maintaining sleep/wakefulness states and energy homeostasis.
Orexin might be especially important for stabilization of behavioral states, because the major symptom in narcolepsy is instability of each behavioral state, which results in sleep/wakefulness fragmentation.
The efferent and afferent systems of orexin neurons suggest interactions between these cells and arousal/sleep-wakefulness centers in the brainstem as well as important feeding centers in the hypothalamus.
Electrophysiological studies have shown that orexin neurons are regulated by monoamines and acetylcholine as well as metabolic cues, including leptin, glucose, and ghrelin.
Thus, orexin neurons have the requisite functional interactions with hypothalamic feeding pathways and monoaminergic/cholinergic centers, and provide a critical link between peripheral energy balance and the central mechanisms that coordinate sleep/wakefulness and motivated behavior such as food seeking.

16531360

It is not clear how the age-related changes in sleep are related to performance and subjective sleepiness at different time of the day.
The aim of the present study was to study work shift related interactions of age with sleep-wakefulness, performance, and social life.
A representative sample of aircraft maintenance workers in a continuous three-shift system was studied by a questionnaire (n = 275) and an on-site field (n = 49) study.
In the field study, sleep length and quality and different ratings of social and other activities were studied with an actigraphy and a Pocket PC diary during 15 consecutive days.
Subjective sleepiness (KSS) and vigilance performance (PVT) were registered at work.
Although the shift type influenced the sleep, subjective sleepiness, performance, and social life, age was distinctly related only to shift-related changes in the amount of sleep, subjective sleepiness, and psychomotor vigilance.
Night shifts were related with shorter sleep, decreased performance, and increased sleepiness.
Although subjective sleepiness was greatest among the youngest (25-34 years) age group during the morning and the night shifts, the increase of performance lapses was higher among the middle-aged (35-49 years) and senior (50-58 years) groups during the night shifts compared to the youngest age group.
According to the questionnaire, older shiftworkers also tended to perceive more frequently that subjective sleepiness decreases their work performance during the morning and night shifts.
The results indicate of no direct link between age-related differences in subjective sleepiness and performance at night work.
The shorter day sleep after the night shifts and higher deterioration of subjective and objective performance according to age urge on development of shift schedules aiming at lower fatigue levels during the night shifts.

26564126

STUDY OBJECTIVES: This study tested the hypothesis that Regulators of G protein Signaling (RGS) proteins contribute to the regulation of wakefulness, non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, and to sleep disruption caused by volatile anesthetics.
METHODS: The three groups used in this study included wild-type (WT; n = 7) mice and knock-in mice that were heterozygous (+/GS; n = 7) or homozygous (GS/GS; n = 7) for an RGS-insensitive allele that causes prolonged Galphai2 signaling.
Mice were implanted with electrodes for recording sleep and conditioned for 1 week or more to sleep in the laboratory.
Using within and between groups designs, 24-h recordings of wakefulness, NREM sleep, and REM sleep were compared across three interventions: (1) baseline (control) and after 3 h of being anesthetized with (2) isoflurane or (3) sevoflurane.
RESULTS: Baseline recordings during the light phase revealed that relative to WT mice, homozygous RGS-insensitive (GS/GS) mice exhibit significantly increased wakefulness and decreased NREM and REM sleep.
During the dark phase, these state-specific differences remained significant but reversed direction of change.
After cessation of isoflurane and sevoflurane anesthesia there was a long-lasting and significant disruption of sleep and wakefulness.
The durations of average episodes of wakefulness, NREM sleep, and REM sleep were significantly altered as a function of genotype and isoflurane and sevoflurane anesthesia.
CONCLUSIONS: RGS proteins and Galphai2 play a significant role in regulating states of wakefulness, NREM sleep, and REM sleep.
Genotype-specific differences demonstrate that RGS proteins modulate sleep disruption caused by isoflurane and sevoflurane anesthesia.
The results also support the conclusion that isoflurane and sevoflurane anesthesia do not satisfy the homeostatic drive for sleep.

16126287

The effects of the destruction of the medial septal neurons (MS) with N-methyl-d-aspartic acid on sleep-wakefulness (S-W), body temperature (Tb), locomotor activity (LMA) and thermal preference were studied in male Wistar rats.
When these rats were given a choice of three ambient temperatures (Tamb) of 24, 27 and 30 degrees C, they preferred 27 degrees C before the lesion.
But they chose 30 degrees C during the initial days and 24 degrees C by the third week after the MS lesion.
The MS lesion produced an increase in paradoxical sleep (PS) though this change was not very evident when the rats were not allowed to choose their Tamb.
Though there was a decrease in slow wave sleep (SWS), it recovered considerably, when the lesioned rats chose their preferred Tamb.
However, the frequency of SWS episodes did not show any recovery.
There was a decrease in both Tb and LMA by the third week after the MS lesion.
It can, therefore, be concluded that the MS lesion affected the initiation of SWS, as there was a decrease in the frequency of SWS episodes.
Study of S-W in the rats that were given freedom to select Tamb helped to demonstrate the role of the MS in the inhibition of PS.
It also showed that the thermostat of the rats was reset at a lower level by the third week after the MS lesion.
Decrease in heat production resulting from a decrease in LMA, could have contributed towards the animals' efforts to maintain a lower Tb.

16339018

Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) plays key roles in sleep-wakefulness regulation.
Evidence indicates that 5-HT2 receptors are involved mainly in non-rapid eye movement sleep (NREMS) regulation and respiratory control.
Here, we investigated the relative contribution of 5-HT(2A), 5-HT(2B), and 5-HT(2C) receptor subtypes to NREMS and breathing during sleep, using 5-HT2 subtype-selective ligands in wild-type (5-HT(2A)+/+) and knock-out (5-HT(2A)-/-) mice that do not express 5-HT(2A) receptors.
Acute blockade of 5-HT(2A) receptors induced an increase in NREMS in 5-HT(2A)+/+ mice, but not 5-HT(2A)-/- mutants, which spontaneously expressed less NREMS than wild-type animals.
In 5-HT(2A)+/+ mice, 5-HT(2B) receptor blockade produced a reduction of NREMS, whereas receptor activation induced an increase in this sleep stage.
These effects were less pronounced in 5-HT(2A)-/- mice, indicating a lower sensitivity of 5-HT(2B) receptors in mutants, with no change in 5-HT(2B) mRNA.
Blockade of 5-HT(2C) receptors had no effect on NREMS in both strains.
In addition, an increase in EEG power density after sleep deprivation was observed in 5-HT(2A)+/+ mice but not in 5-HT(2A)-/- mice.
Whole-body plethysmographic recordings indicated that 5-HT(2A) receptor blockade in 5-HT(2A)+/+ mice reduced NREMS apneas and bradypneas that occurred after sighs.
In contrast, in 5-HT(2A)-/- mutants, NREMS apneas were not modified, and bradypnea after sighs were more pronounced.
Our results demonstrate that 5-HT exerts a 5-HT(2B)-mediated facilitation of NREMS, and an influence respectively inhibitory on NREMS and facilitatory on sleep apnea generation, via 5-HT(2A) receptors.
Moreover, 5-HT(2A) gene knock-out leads to functional compensations yielding adaptive changes opposite to those caused by pharmacological blockade of 5-HT(2A) receptors in 5-HT(2A)+/+ mice.

25865143

Many aspects of brain function are influenced by modulatory processes, including arousal.
The most abrupt changes in arousal occur at the wake-sleep transition and at the induction of anesthetic conditions.
They are accompanied by major electrophysiological changes, including an emergence of low-frequency (sleep-like) activity and a loss of mid-frequency (wake-like) activity that has been linked to feedback processes of the brain.
Nevertheless, the causal relationship between these two types of electrophysiological changes, as well as the cortical mechanisms underlying changes in arousal and consciousness, remain poorly understood.
To address this, we studied spontaneous electro-cortical activity during arousal changes in macaques.
During sleep and at loss of consciousness induced by propofol anesthesia, we identified a prototypical sequence of cortical events in which the loss of mid-frequency activity preceded, by seconds, the increases in low-frequency activity.
Furthermore, in visual areas, an influence of mid-frequency change onto high-frequency activity was observed across visual hierarchy.
These results are consistent with the notion that drops in arousal and consciousness are facilitated by a release of feedback cortical inhibition.

15152981

Several pieces of evidence suggest that the noradrenergic afferents in the medial preoptic area produce sleep and hypothermia by acting on alphal adrenergic receptors.
On the other hand, in a few studies monitoring body temperature with a rectal probe, preoptic injection of the alphal adrenergic agonist methoxamine produced contradictory changes in body temperature and sleep-wakefulness.
Such contradictions call for the re-examination of methoxamine induced body temperature changes using a better technique like telemetric recording.
In the present study, we monitored body temperature and sleep-wakefulness simultaneously after the micro-injection of 0.5, 1, and 2 micromol methoxamine, into the medial preoptic area of adult male Wistar rats.
Methoxamine injection produced hypothermia but no major change in sleep-wakefulness during the 3 hours after drug injection, except for a short period (15 min) of sleep after 120 min of injection.
A short period of wakefulness, coinciding with the maximum fall in body temperature (30 min after injection) occurred when methoxamine was administered at higher doses.
The results of this study indicate that alphal adrenergic receptors participate in preoptically mediated thermoregulatory measures that reduce body temperature.
Hypothermia induced by methoxamine might have masked the hypnogenic action of this drug.

======================================================================
Sustained_Threat
======================================================================
26678871

Several lines of evidence suggest that the amygdala and the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) are differentially involved in phasic and sustained fear.
Even though, results from neuroimaging studies support this distinction, a specific effect of a temporal dissociation with phasic responses to onset versus sustained responses during prolonged states of threat anticipation has not been shown yet.
To explore this issue, we investigated brain activation during anticipation of threat in 38 healthy participants by means of functional magnetic resonance imaging.
Participants were presented different visual cues indicated the temporally unpredictable occurrence of a subsequent aversive or neutral stimulus.
During the onset of aversive versus neutral anticipatory cues, results showed a differential phasic activation of amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC).
In contrast, activation in the BNST and other brain regions, including insula, dorsolateral PFC, ACC, cuneus, posterior cingulate cortex, and periaqueductal grey was characterized by a sustained response during the threat versus neutral anticipation period.
Analyses of functional connectivity showed phasic amygdala response as positively associated with activation, mainly in sensory cortex areas whereas sustained BNST activation was negatively associated with activation in visual cortex and positively correlated with activation in the insula and thalamus.
These findings suggest that the amygdala is responsive to the onset of cues signaling the unpredictable occurrence of a potential threat while the BNST in concert with other areas is involved in sustained anxiety.
Furthermore, the amygdala and BNST are characterized by distinctive connectivity patterns during threat anticipation.

26877129

The error-related negativity (ERN) currently appears as a physiological measure in relation to three Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) constructs: Cognitive Control, Sustained Threat, and Reward Learning.
We propose a conceptual model in which variance in the ERN reflects individual differences in the degree to which errors are evaluated as threatening.
We also discuss evidence for the placement of the ERN in the "Sustained Threat" construct, as well as evidence that the ERN may more specifically reflect sensitivity to endogenous threat.
Following this, we present data from a sample of 515 adolescent females demonstrating a larger ERN in relation to self-reported checking behaviors, but only in older adolescents, suggesting that sensitivity to internal threat and the ERN-checking relationship may follow a developmental course as adolescents develop behavioral control.
In contrast, depressive symptoms were linked to a smaller ERN, and this association was invariant with respect to age.
Collectively, these data suggest that the magnitude of the ERN is sensitive both to specific anxiety-related processes and depression, in opposing directions that may reflect variation in internal threat sensitivity.
We discuss directions for future research, as well as ways in which findings for the ERN complement and challenge aspects of the current RDoC matrix.

28066706

Blood-injection-injury (BII) phobia differs from other subtypes of specific phobia in that it is associated with elevated disgust-sensitivity as well as specific autonomic and brain responses during processing of phobia-relevant stimuli.
To what extent these features play a role already during threat anticipation is unclear.
In the current fMRI experiment, 16 female BII phobics and 16 female healthy controls anticipated the presentation of phobia-specific and neutral pictures.
On the behavioral level, anxiety dominated the anticipatory period in BII phobics relative to controls, while both anxiety and disgust were elevated during picture presentation.
By applying two different models for the analysis of brain responses to anticipation of phobia-specific versus neutral stimuli, we found initial and sustained increases of activation in anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), insula, lateral and medial prefrontal cortex (PFC), thalamus and visual areas, as well as initial activation in the amygdala for BII phobics as compared to healthy controls.
These results suggest that BII phobia is characterized by activation of a typical neural defense network during threat anticipation, with anxiety as the predominant emotion.

28331799

Different degrees of threat predictability are thought to induce either phasic fear or sustained anxiety.
Maladaptive, sustained anxious apprehension is thought to result in overgeneralization of anxiety and thereby to contribute to the development of anxiety disorders.
Therefore, differences in threat predictability have been associated with pathological states of anxiety with specific phobia (SP) representing phasic fear as heightened response to predictable threat, while panic disorder (PD) is characterized by sustained anxiety (unpredictable threat) and, as a consequence, overgeneralization of fear.
The present study aimed to delineate commonalities and differences in the neural substrates of the impact of threat predictability on affective processing in these two anxiety disorders.
Twenty PD patients, 20 SP patients and 20 non-anxious control subjects were investigated with an adapted NPU-design (no, predictable, unpredictable threat) using whole-head magnetoencephalography (MEG).
Group independent neural activity in the right dlPFC increased with decreasing threat predictability.
PD patients showed a sustained hyperactivation of the vmPFC under threat and safety conditions.
The magnitude of hyperactivation was inversely correlated with PDs subjective arousal and anxiety sensitivity.
Both PD and SP patients revealed decreased parietal processing of affective stimuli.
Findings indicate overgeneralization between threat and safety conditions and increased need for emotion regulation via the vmPFC in PD, but not SP patients.
Both anxiety disorders showed decreased activation in parietal networks possibly indicating attentional avoidance of affective stimuli.
Present results complement findings from fear conditioning studies and underline overgeneralization of fear, particularly in PD.

26877131

The creation of the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) project has been the driving force behind the reconceptualization of the pathogenesis of psychiatric disorders.
In this commentary, I explore whether the error-related negativity can be considered as a transdiagnostic marker of sustained threat based on findings from Weinberg, Meyer et al's (2016) study in relation to current findings in the literature.
Potential alternative study designs, use of a multimodal approach to the assessment of a specific phenotype of clinical phenomenon, and the importance of integrating a neurodevelopmental perspective are also discussed.

26369836

Biased attention to emotional stimuli plays a key role in the RDoC constructs of Sustained Threat and Loss.
In this article, we review approaches to assessing these biases, their links with psychopathology, and the underlying neural influences.
We then review evidence from twin and candidate gene studies regarding genetic influences on attentional biases.
We also discuss the impact of developmental and environmental influences and end with a number of suggestions for future research in this area.

27208859

The anxiety inducing paradigms such as the threat-of-shock paradigm have provided ample data on the emotional processing of predictable and unpredictable threat, but little is known about the processing of aversive, threat-irrelevant stimuli in these paradigms.
We investigated how the predictability of threat influences the neural visual processing of threat-irrelevant fearful and neutral faces.
Thirty-two healthy individuals participated in an NPU-threat test, consisting of a safe or neutral condition (N) and a predictable (P) as well as an unpredictable (U) threat condition, using audio-visual threat stimuli.
In all NPU-conditions, we registered participants' brain responses to threat-irrelevant faces via magnetoencephalography.
The data showed that increasing unpredictability of threat evoked increasing emotion regulation during face processing predominantly in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex regions during an early to mid-latency time interval.
Importantly, we obtained only main effects but no significant interaction of facial expression and conditions of different threat predictability, neither in behavioral nor in neural data.
Healthy individuals with average trait anxiety are thus able to maintain adaptive stimulus evaluation processes under predictable and unpredictable threat conditions.

30178728

BACKGROUND: Cognitive models of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) implicate threat-related attentional biases in the etiology and phenomenology of the disorder.
However, extant attentional research using reaction time (RT)-based paradigms and measures has yielded mixed results.
Eye-tracking methodology has emerged in recent years to overcome several inherent drawbacks of RT-based tasks, striving to better delineate attentional processes.
METHODS: A systematic review of experimental studies examining threat-related attention biases in PTSD, using eye-tracking methodology and group-comparison designs, was conducted conforming to Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) guidelines.
Studies were selected following a systematic search for publications between 1980 and December 2017 in PsycINFO, MEDLINE and the National Center for PTSD Research's Published International Literature on Traumatic Stress (PILOTS) database.
Additional records were identified by employing the Similar Articles feature in PubMed, and the Cited Reference Search in ISI Web of Science.
Reference sections of review articles, book chapters and studies selected for inclusion were searched for further studies.
Ongoing studies were also sought through Clinicaltrials.gov.
RESULTS: A total of 11 studies (n = 456 participants in total) were included in the final review.
Results indicated little support for enhanced threat detection, hypervigilance and attentional avoidance.
However, consistent evidence emerged for sustained attention on threat (i.e., attention maintenance) in PTSD.
CONCLUSIONS: This review is the first to systematically evaluate extant findings in PTSD emanating from eye-tracking studies employing group-comparison designs.
Results suggest that sustained attention on threat might serve as a potential target for therapeutic intervention.

25460498

Contextual fear conditioning takes place if the occurrence of threat cannot be predicted by specific cues.
As a consequence the context becomes the best predictor of the threat and later induces anxiety (sustained fear response).
Previous studies suggest that both the amygdala and the hippocampus are crucial for contextual fear conditioning.
First, we wanted to further elucidate the neuronal correlates of long-lasting contextual threat within a highly ecologically setting created in virtual reality (VR).
Second, we wanted to distinguish between initial and sustained components of the anxiety response to a threatening situation.
Twenty-four participants were guided through two virtual offices for 30s each.
They received unpredictable electric stimuli (unconditioned stimulus, US) in one office (anxiety context, CXT+), but never in the second office (safety context, CXT-).
Successful contextual fear conditioning was indexed by higher anxiety and enhanced US-expectancy ratings for CXT+ versus CXT-.
Initial neural activity was assessed by modeling the onsets of both contexts, and sustained neural activity by considering the entire context duration (contrasts: CXT+ > CXT-).
Amygdala and hippocampus revealed sustained activity.
Initial and sustained activities were found in the middle temporal gyrus, and primary motor cortex (M1).
Additional initial activity was obvious in orbitofrontal (OFC), dorsomedial (dmPFC), and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC).
These results suggest that entering a threatening context initially induces conditioned fear reactions (M1), recall of contingency awareness (dlPFC), and explicit threat appraisal (dmPFC, OFC).
While remaining in the threatening context might involve anxiety-like conditioned responses (amygdala, M1) and the generation of a spatial map to predict where and when a threatening event may occur (hippocampus).
We conclude that in humans initial versus sustained anxiety responses triggered by a threat associated context are associated with distinguishable brain activation patterns involving a fear network and a "contingency-cognitive" network, respectively.

29397080

BACKGROUND: Abnormal patterns of attention to threat and reward have been proposed as potential mechanisms of dysfunction in anxiety and mood disorders.
However, research on this topic has been inconsistent, perhaps because of both clinical heterogeneity in the samples assessed and measurement of attentional biases that is temporally imprecise.
METHODS: The present study measured transdiagnostic symptoms of anxiety and depression in 205 young adults and recorded affect-modulated event-related potentials in response to task-irrelevant pictures in a speeded response task.
RESULTS: Low positive affect was uniquely associated with reduced modulation of later event-related potentials (i.e., the P300 and the late positive potential) by rewarding images, suggesting deficits in sustained attention to reward.
Low positive affect was also associated with a blunted threat-elicited late positive potential.
Symptoms of panic were associated with an increased N1 to rewarding images, as well as an increased late positive potential to all picture types.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that dysfunction in neural markers of sustained attention to threat and reward relate in specific ways to transdiagnostic symptom dimensions of anxiety and depression.
Moreover, event-related potentials are likely to be useful in investigations of the time course of attentional abnormalities associated with these symptom dimensions.

29382815

The bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) and central amygdala (CeA) of the extended amygdala are small, anatomically interconnected brain regions.
They are thought to mediate responses to sustained, unpredictable threat stimuli and phasic, predictable threat stimuli, respectively.
They perform these operations largely through their interconnected networks.
In two previous studies, we mapped and contrasted the resting functional connectivity networks of the BNST and CeA at 7 Tesla with high resolution.
This follow-up study investigates the changes in functional connectivity of these structures during sustained anticipation of electric shock.
Results show that the BNST and CeA become less strongly coupled with the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), cingulate, and nucleus accumbens in shock threat relative to a safety condition.
In addition, the CeA becomes more strongly coupled with the thalamus under threat.
An exploratory, whole-brain connectivity analysis reveals that, although the BNST/CeA exhibits generally decreased connectivity, many other cortical regions demonstrate greater coupling under threat than safety.
Understanding the differential network structures of these two regions and how they contribute to processing under threat will help elucidate the building blocks of the anxious state.

20497902

Though a key symptom underlying many anxiety disorders is hypervigilant threat monitoring, its biological bases in humans remain poorly understood.
Animal models suggest that anxious processes such as hypervigilant threat monitoring are distinct from cued fear-like responses and mediated by the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST).
Here, we applied psychophysiological and neuroimaging methodologies sensitive to sustained arousal-based responses to test the role of the human BNST in mediating environmental threat monitoring, a potential experimental model for sustained anxiety symptoms.
Healthy participants (n = 50) with varying trait anxiety performed an environmental threat-monitoring task during functional magnetic resonance imaging where a stimulus line continuously fluctuated in height, providing information relevant to subsequent risk for electric shocks.
Skin conductance was collected in a separate cohort (n = 47) to validate task-evoked modulation of physiological arousal.
A forebrain region consistent with the BNST showed greater overall recruitment and exaggerated tracking of threat proximity in individuals with greater anxiety.
The insular cortex tracked threat proximity across all participants, showed exaggerated threat proximity responding with greater anxiety, and showed enhanced recruitment when threat proximity was ostensibly controllable.
Activity in the BNST and insula continuously monitored changes in environmental threat level and also subserved hypervigilant threat-monitoring processes in more highly trait anxious individuals.
These findings bridge human and animal research informing the role of the BNST in anxious-related processes.
In addition, these findings suggest that continuous functional magnetic resonance imaging paradigms offer promise in further elucidating the neural circuitries supporting sustained anticipatory features of anxiety.

25969398

Researchers have only recently begun using functional neuroimaging to explore the human response to periods of sustained anxious anticipation, namely potential threat.
Here, we investigated brain responses acquired with functional MRI during an instructed threat of shock paradigm used to create sustained periods of aversive anticipation.
In this re-analysis of previously published data, we employed quadratic discriminant analysis to classify the multivariate pattern of whole-brain functional connectivity and to identify connectivity changes during periods of potential threat.
Our method identifies clusters with altered connectivity on a voxelwise basis, thus eschewing the need to define regions a priori.
Classifier generalization was evaluated by testing on data from participants not used during training.
Robust classification between threat and safe contexts was possible, and inspection of "diagnostic features" revealed altered functional connectivity involving the intraparietal sulcus, task-negative regions, striatum, and anterior cingulate cortex.
We anticipate that the proposed method will prove useful to experimenters wishing to identify large-scale functional networks that distinguish between experimental conditions or groups.

23342060

The present study examined the effects of sustained anticipatory anxiety on the affective modulation of the eyeblink startle reflex.
Towards this end, pleasant, neutral and unpleasant pictures were presented as a continuous stream during alternating threat-of-shock and safety periods, which were cued by colored picture frames.
Orbicularis-EMG to auditory startle probes and electrodermal activity were recorded.
Previous findings regarding affective picture valence and threat-of-shock modulation were replicated.
Of main interest, anticipating aversive events and viewing affective pictures additively modulated defensive activation.
Specifically, despite overall potentiated startle blink magnitude in threat-of-shock conditions, the startle reflex remained sensitive to hedonic picture valence.
Finally, skin conductance level revealed sustained sympathetic activation throughout the entire experiment during threat- compared to safety-periods.
Overall, defensive activation by physical threat appears to operate independently from reflex modulation by picture media.
The present data confirms the importance of simultaneously manipulating phasic-fear and sustained-anxiety in studying both normal and abnormal anxiety.

26115440

BACKGROUND: Processes of phasic fear responses to threatening stimuli are thought to be distinct from sustained, anticipatory anxiety toward an unpredicted, potential threat.
There is evidence for dissociable neural correlates of phasic fear and sustained anxiety.
Whereas increased amygdala activity has been associated with phasic fear, sustained anxiety has been linked with activation of the bed nucleus of stria terminalis (BNST), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and the insula.
So far, only a few studies have focused on the dissociation of neural processes related to both phasic and sustained fear in specific phobia.
We suggested that first, conditions of phasic and sustained fear would involve different neural networks and, second, that overall neural activity would be enhanced in a sample of phobic compared to nonphobic participants.
METHODS: Pictures of spiders and neutral stimuli under conditions of either predicted (phasic) or unpredicted (sustained) fear were presented to 28 subjects with spider phobia and 28 nonphobic control subjects during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scanning.
RESULTS: Phobic patients revealed significantly higher amygdala activation than controls under conditions of phasic fear.
Sustained fear processing was significantly related to activation in the insula and ACC, and phobic patients showed a stronger activation than controls of the BNST and the right ACC under conditions of sustained fear.
Functional connectivity analysis revealed enhanced connectivity of the BNST and the amygdala in phobic subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support the idea of distinct neural correlates of phasic and sustained fear processes.
Increased neural activity and functional connectivity in these networks might be crucial for the development and maintenance of anxiety disorders.

23127296

Anxiety disorders increase risk for the early development of several diseases of aging.
Elevated inflammation, a common risk factor across diseases of aging, may play a key role in the relationship between anxiety and physical disease.
However, the neurobiological mechanisms linking anxiety with elevated inflammation remain unclear.
In this review, we present a neurobiological model of the mechanisms by which anxiety promotes inflammation.
Specifically we propose that exaggerated neurobiological sensitivity to threat in anxious individuals may lead to sustained threat perception, which is accompanied by prolonged activation of threat-related neural circuitry and threat-responsive biological systems including the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, autonomic nervous system (ANS), and inflammatory response.
Over time, this pattern of responding can promote chronic inflammation through structural and functional brain changes, altered sensitivity of immune cell receptors, dysregulation of the HPA axis and ANS, and accelerated cellular aging.
Chronic inflammation, in turn, increases risk for diseases of aging.
Exaggerated neurobiological sensitivity to threat may thus be a treatment target for reducing disease risk in anxious individuals.

28070973

Feelings of uncontrollability and anxiety regarding possibly harmful events are key features of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptomatology.
Due to a lack of studies, the neural correlates of anticipatory anxiety in PTSD are still poorly understood.
During functional magnetic resonance imaging, female PTSD patients with interpersonal violence trauma and healthy controls (HC) anticipated the temporally unpredictable presentation of aversive (human scream) or neutral sounds.
Based on separate analysis models, we investigated phasic and sustained brain activations.
PTSD patients reported increased anxiety during anticipation of aversive versus neutral sounds.
Furthermore, we found both increased initial, phasic amygdala activation and increased sustained activation of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) during anticipation of aversive versus neutral sounds in PTSD patients in comparison to HC.
PTSD patients as compared with HC also showed increased phasic responses in mid-cingulate cortex (MCC), posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), mid-insula and lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) as well as increased sustained responses in MCC, PCC, anterior insula and lateral and medial PFC.
Our results demonstrate a relationship between anticipatory anxiety in PTSD patients and hyperresponsiveness of brain regions that have previously been associated with PTSD symptomatology.
Additionally, the dissociation between amygdala and BNST indicates distinct temporal and functional characteristics and suggests that phasic fear and sustained anxiety responses are enhanced during unpredictable anticipation of aversive stimuli in PTSD.
Hum Brain Mapp 38:2190-2205, 2017 (c) 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

21601831

BACKGROUND: The amygdala has been strongly implicated in the processing of threat-relevant information in specific phobia.
However, there is an ongoing debate as to whether the amygdala may also be engaged outside of conscious stimulus awareness.
Furthermore, considering that sustained vigilance for threat constitutes a crucial characteristic of specific phobias, we hypothesized a possible role of this symptom in modulating amygdala sensitivity to disorder-relevant cues.
Using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging, we examined responses of the amygdala to subliminal and supraliminal phobogenic stimuli in spider-phobic subjects and whether these responses might be specifically associated with disorder-related hypervigilance.
METHODS: Eighteen female spider-phobic subjects and 18 healthy female control subjects were exposed to pictures of spiders and phobia-irrelevant objects, presented briefly during two backward-masking conditions used to manipulate stimulus awareness.
Brain activation data were analyzed as a function of subjects' perceptual performance on each single trial and were tested for correlations with different components of the phobic symptomatology, such as vigilance, as assessed by self-report scales.
RESULTS: Compared with control subjects, phobic participants showed stronger responses of both amygdalae to consciously perceived spiders versus nonspider targets, whereas during unconscious stimulus processing, enhanced activation was only apparent in the right amygdala.
Moreover, the intensity of disorder-related vigilance was positively correlated with right amygdala activation specifically during the subliminal condition.
These findings provide evidence for unconscious threat processing in specific phobia, with the magnitude of amygdala responses specifically potentiated by sustained hypervigilance for threat.
Aberrations in this vigilance system may be critically involved in anxiety disorders.

